Parallel Computing 124 (2025) 103136

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Parallel Computing
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/parco

Byzantine-tolerant detection of causality: There is no holy grailI
Anshuman Misra a,b , Ajay D. Kshemkalyani a
a
b

,∗

Department of Computer Science, University of Illinois Chicago, Chicago, 60607, IL, USA
Department of Computer Science, Purdue University Fort Wayne, Fort Wayne, 46805, IN, USA

ARTICLE

INFO

Keywords:
Byzantine fault-tolerance
Causality
‘‘Happened before’’ relation
Asynchronous system
Distributed system
Message-passing

ABSTRACT
Detecting causality or the ‘‘happened before’’ relation between events in an asynchronous distributed system
is a widely used building block in distributed applications. To the best of our knowledge, this problem has
not been examined in a system with Byzantine processes. We prove the following results for an asynchronous
system with Byzantine processes. (1) We prove that it is impossible to determine causality between events
in the presence of even a single Byzantine process when processes communicate by unicasting. (2) We also
prove a similar impossibility result when processes communicate by broadcasting. (3) We also prove a similar
impossibility result when processes communicate by multicasting. (4–5) In an execution where there exists
a causal path between two events passing through only correct processes, we prove that it is possible to
detect causality between such a pair of events when processes communicate by unicasting or broadcasting.
(6) However, when processes communicate by multicasting and there exists a causal path between two events
passing through only correct processes, we prove that it is impossible to detect causality between such a
pair of events. (7–9) Even with the use of cryptography, we prove that the impossibility results of (1–3) for
unicasts, broadcasts, and multicasts, respectively, hold. (10–12) With the use of cryptography, when there
exists a causal path between two events passing through only correct processes, we prove it is possible to
detect causality between such a pair of events, irrespective of whether the communication is by unicasts,
broadcasts, or multicasts. Our results are significant because Byzantine systems mirror the real world.

1. Introduction
Causality is an important tool in understanding and reasoning about
distributed system executions [2]. In a seminal paper, Lamport formulated the ‘‘happened before’’ or the causality relation, denoted →,
between events in an asynchronous distributed system [3]. Given two
events 𝑒 and 𝑒′ , the causality determination problem asks to determine
whether 𝑒 → 𝑒′ . Applications of causality determination include determining consistent recovery points in distributed databases, deadlock
detection, termination detection, distributed predicate detection, distributed debugging and monitoring, the detection of race conditions
and other synchronization errors [4].
The causality relation between events can be captured by tracking causality graphs [5], scalar clocks [3], vector clocks [6–8], matrix and higher-dimensional clocks [9] and numerous other variants
(such as hierarchical clocks [10,11], plausible clocks [12], incremental
clocks [13], dotted version vectors [14], interval tree clocks [15],
logical physical clocks [16], encoded vector clocks [17], and Bloom
clocks [18,19] to mention a few), proposed since Lamport’s seminal
paper [3]. Indirections in knowledge about local logical times can be

captured by the abstraction in [9]. See [2,4] or a more recent survey included in [20]. Some of these variants track causality accurately while
others introduce approximations and inaccuracies as trade-offs in the
interest of savings on the space and/or time and/or message complexity
overheads. As enunciated by Schwarz and Mattern [2], the search for
the holy grail of the ideal causality tracking mechanism is on. However,
all these works in the literature assume that processes are correct.
To the best of our knowledge, there has been no work on detecting
the causality relation between events in the presence of Byzantine
processes in the system. It is important to solve this problem under the
Byzantine failure model as opposed to a failure-free setting because it
mirrors the real world.
The related problem of causal ordering of messages asks that if the
send event of message 𝑚 happened before the send event of message
𝑚′ , then 𝑚′ should not be delivered before 𝑚 at all common destinations
of 𝑚 and 𝑚′ [21]. Causal ordering of messages has numerous applications such as in distributed data stores, fair resource allocation, and
collaborative applications such as social networks, multiplayer online
gaming, group editing of documents, event notification systems, and

I An earlier version of this result appeared in Proceedings of IEEE NCA 2022, Misra and Kshemkalyani (2022) [1].
∗ Corresponding author.

E-mail address: ajay@uic.edu (A.D. Kshemkalyani).
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.parco.2025.103136
Received 22 July 2024; Received in revised form 22 March 2025; Accepted 29 March 2025
Available online 9 April 2025
0167-8191/© 2025 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. This is an open access article under the CC BY license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).

Parallel Computing 124 (2025) 103136

A. Misra and A.D. Kshemkalyani

Table 1
𝐵
Detecting causality between events under different communication modes. 𝐹 𝑃 is false positive, 𝐹 𝑁 is false negative. 𝐹 𝑃𝐵 is false positive under ←←←→.
← 𝐹 𝑁𝐵 is false negative under
𝐵

𝐵

𝐵

←←←→.
← 𝐹 𝑃 , 𝐹 𝑃𝐵 , 𝐹 𝑁𝐵 indicate that the corresponding false positives under →, false positives under ←←←→,
← false negatives under ←←←→
← cannot occur. Next to each result, the relation between
𝑡 (number of Byzantine processes) and 𝑛 (total number of processes) is given.
Mode of

Detecting ‘‘happened

Detecting ‘‘Byzantine

Detecting ‘‘happened

Detecting ‘‘Byzantine

communication

before’’ 𝑒 → 𝑒′

happened before’’ 𝑒 ←←←→
← 𝑒′

before’’ 𝑒 → 𝑒′ using
cryptography

happened before’’ 𝑒 ←←←→
← 𝑒′
using cryptography

Unicasts

Impossible, Theorem 3
𝐹 𝑃 (𝑡 > 0), 𝐹 𝑁 (𝑡 > 0)

Possible, Theorem 6
𝐹 𝑃𝐵 (𝑡 < 𝑛), 𝐹 𝑁𝐵 (𝑡 < 𝑛)

Impossible, Theorem 10
𝐹 𝑃 a (𝑡 < 𝑛∕3), 𝐹 𝑁 (𝑡 > 0)

Possible, Theorem 12
𝐹 𝑃𝐵 (𝑡 < 𝑛), 𝐹 𝑁𝐵 (𝑡 < 𝑛)

Broadcasts

Impossible, Theorem 4
𝐹 𝑃 (𝑡 < 𝑛∕3), 𝐹 𝑁 (𝑡 > 0)

Possible, Theorem 7
𝐹 𝑃𝐵 (𝑡 < 𝑛), 𝐹 𝑁𝐵 (𝑡 < 𝑛)

Impossible, Theorem 11
𝐹 𝑃 (𝑡 < 𝑛∕3), 𝐹 𝑁 (𝑡 > 0)

Possible, Theorem 13
𝐹 𝑃𝐵 (𝑡 < 𝑛), 𝐹 𝑁𝐵 (𝑡 < 𝑛)

Multicasts

Impossibleb,c , Theorem 5
𝐹 𝑃 (𝑡 > 0), 𝐹 𝑁 (𝑡 > 0)

Impossibleb , Theorem 8
𝐹 𝑃𝐵 (𝑡 > 0), 𝐹 𝑁𝐵 (𝑡 > 0)

Impossible, Theorem 9
𝐹 𝑃 a (𝑡 < 𝑛∕3), 𝐹 𝑁 (𝑡 > 0)

Possible, Theorem 14
𝐹 𝑃𝐵 (𝑡 < 𝑛), 𝐹 𝑁𝐵 (𝑡 < 𝑛)

𝐵

𝐵

a

False positive 𝐹 𝑃 holds if the semantics of the message content in a message dependency matters.
Without using cryptography, it is impossible to implement Byzantine Reliable Multicast (BRM) in multiple groups as this entails identifying the Byzantine processes to satisfy
𝑡𝐺 < |𝐺|∕3, where 𝑡𝐺 is the number of Byzantine processes in group 𝐺.
b

c

Even with access to a black box that implements BRM within groups, 𝐹 𝑃 and 𝐹 𝑁 hold.

distributed virtual environments. Causal ordering of messages under
the Byzantine failure model has recently been examined in [22] for
broadcast communication and in [23–28] for unicast, multicast, as well
as broadcast communication. An algorithm for Byzantine causal order
of broadcast messages was given in [22]; this was based on a definition
of Byzantine causal order on broadcast messages. This definition was
modified in several ways to account for the purest (weakest) notion
of safety [23], and several possibility and impossibility results about
Byzantine causal order of unicast, multicast, and broadcast messages
were proved [23]. The algorithm in [22] is an instantiation for one of
the many results proved in [23] on causal ordering of messages. Several
algorithms for causal ordering of messages under varied settings and
assumptions on the system model were given in [24–28]. In contrast,
this paper uses a definition of Byzantine causal order on events that can
be viewed as an adaptation of the definition in [23].
Contributions: Our main result is that it is impossible to (deterministically) determine the causality relation → between two events 𝑒1 and
𝑒2 when there is even a single Byzantine process in an asynchronous
distributed system. False negatives and/or false positives are possible. A
false negative means that 𝑒 → 𝑒′ whereas 𝑒 ↛ 𝑒′ is perceived/detected.
A false positive means that 𝑒 ↛ 𝑒′ whereas 𝑒 → 𝑒′ is detected. In light
of this negative result, we investigate whether any positive result can
be shown in a system with stronger assumptions.

4. In an execution where there exists a causal path between two
𝐵

events passing through only correct processes, i.e., ←←←→
← holds between the two events, and processes communicate by unicasting,
we prove that it is possible to detect causality between such
a pair of events (Theorem 6). Neither false positives nor false
𝐵

negatives can occur under ←←←→.
← But under the → relation, false
positives and false negatives can occur.
5. We also prove a similar possibility result when processes communicate by broadcasting and there exists a causal path between
𝐵

two events passing through only correct processes, i.e., ←←←→
← holds
between the two events (Theorem 7). Neither false positives nor
𝐵

false negatives can occur under ←←←→.
← Under the → relation, false
positives cannot occur but false negatives can occur.
6. We prove an impossibility result when processes communicate
by multicasting and there exists a causal path between two
𝐵

events passing through only correct processes, i.e., ←←←→
← holds
between the two events (Theorem 8). False positives and false
𝐵

negatives may occur under ←←←→
← and under the → relation.
7. We prove that is impossible to determine causality between
events in the presence of even a single Byzantine process when
processes communicate by multicasting, even when cryptographic techniques are used (Theorem 9). False positives do not
occur (provided the semantics of contents of messages are not
accounted for) but false negatives can occur.
8. We also prove that the same above impossibility result holds
when processes communicate by unicasting despite the use of
cryptography (Theorem 10).
9. We prove an impossibility result for broadcasts allowing the
use of cryptography and show it is the same as that without
cryptography (Theorem 11) — false positives do not occur but
false negatives can occur.
10. With the use of cryptography, when there exists a causal path
between two events passing through only correct processes, we
prove it is possible to detect causality between such a pair of
events, irrespective of whether the communication is by unicasts
(Theorem 12), broadcasts (Theorem 13), or multicasts (Theorem
14). Neither false positives nor false negatives can occur under

𝐵

• First, we introduce the Byzantine happened before relation ←←←→,
←
𝐵

where 𝑒1 ←←←→
← 𝑒2 if 𝑒1 → 𝑒2 and there exists a causal path from 𝑒1
to 𝑒2 via the transitive closure of the local order of events and the
order of message-passing send and corresponding receive events,
𝐵

going through only correct (non-Byzantine) processes. If 𝑒1 ←←←→
← 𝑒2,
then we show that causality can be determined for unicasts and
broadcasts but not for multicasts.
• Second, we show that even with the use of cryptography, the impossibility results for unicasts, multicasts, and broadcasts remain.
• Third, with the use of cryptography, we show possibility results
𝐵

for unicasts, broadcasts, and multicasts under ←←←→.
←
We prove the following results for an asynchronous system with
Byzantine processes.

𝐵

1. We prove that it is impossible to determine causality between
events in the presence of even a single Byzantine process when
processes communicate by unicasting (Theorem 3). This is because both false positives and false negatives can occur.
2. We also prove a similar impossibility result when processes
communicate by broadcasting (Theorem 4). In this case, false
positives cannot occur but false negatives can occur.
3. We also prove a similar impossibility result when processes
communicate by multicasting (Theorem 5). Both false positives
and false negatives can occur.

←←←→
← while no false positives but false negatives can occur under
→.
Table 1 summarizes these results. For each result, the relationship
between the number of Byzantine processes 𝑡 and the total number of
processes 𝑛 is also stated. The key technical difficulty was in identifying
and analyzing the various cases, and proving the results. An earlier
version of this paper was published as [1]. It has been significantly enhanced and has added details and reworked, formal proofs. New results
in a new Section 4.1 and on the solvability of detecting causality using
2

Parallel Computing 124 (2025) 103136

A. Misra and A.D. Kshemkalyani

1. Program Order: For the sequence of events ⟨𝑒1𝑖 , 𝑒2𝑖 , …⟩ executed

cryptography in a new Section 4.4 are added. A new Section 5 gives
certain relationships between the causality determination problem in
asynchronous systems and related problems/models.
Roadmap. Section 2 gives the system model. Section 3 formulates
the problem of detecting causality. Section 4 proves the results outlined under ‘‘Contributions’’ above. Section 5 proves some relationships
between the causality detection problem and other related problems.
Section 6 gives a discussion and concludes.

𝐵

by a correct process 𝑝𝑖 , ∀ 𝑥, 𝑦 such that 𝑥 < 𝑦 we have 𝑒𝑥𝑖 ←←←→
← 𝑒𝑦𝑖 .
𝑥
2. Message Order: If event 𝑒𝑖 is a message send event executed at
correct process 𝑝𝑖 and 𝑒𝑦𝑗 is the corresponding message receive
𝐵

event at correct process 𝑝𝑗 , then 𝑒𝑥𝑖 ←←←→
← 𝑒𝑦𝑗 .
𝐵

𝐵

𝐵

3. Transitive Order: If 𝑒 ←←←→
← 𝑒′ ∧ 𝑒′ ←←←→
← 𝑒′′ then 𝑒 ←←←→
← 𝑒′′ .
𝐵

When 𝑒 ←←←→
← 𝑒′ , then there exists a causal chain from 𝑒 to 𝑒′ along
correct processes that sent messages along that chain.
Note that the classic happened before relation (Definition 1) applies
regardless of the failure model. However, as we prove, detecting it without both false positives and false negatives is impossible in all system
model settings considered under the Byzantine failure model. Hence a
weaker variant – the Byzantine happened before relation (Definition
3) – has been defined. A version of this definition was first defined on
messages [22,23,25]. This definition weakens the causality property to
make it detectable in some system model settings under the Byzantine
failure model. In essence, the choice between the two relations is
an application-level decision rather than an intrinsic property of the
Byzantine failure model. Depending on the possibility of detection, the
level of causal guarantees required, and costs, an application can select
the appropriate relation to meet its requirements.
There are three modes of communication: multicast, unicast, and
broadcast. In multicast, a message is sent to a group 𝐺 of processes
corresponding to some subset of 𝑃 . A unicast is a multicast where
|𝐺| = 1. A broadcast is a multicast where 𝐺 = 𝑃 . We specify the
multicast definition formally, tailored for Byzantine-tolerant systems.

2. System model
This paper deals with an asynchronous distributed system having
Byzantine processes which are processes that can misbehave [29,30].
A correct process behaves exactly as specified by the algorithm whereas
a Byzantine process may deviate arbitrarily from its protocol behavior.
A Byzantine process cannot impersonate another process or spawn
new processes. Besides distributed systems, Byzantine attacks have
been extensively studied in many physical systems and multi-agent
systems [31,32].
The distributed system is modeled as an undirected graph 𝐺 =
(𝑃 , 𝐶). Here 𝑃 is the set of processes communicating asynchronously
in the distributed system. Let |𝑃 | = 𝑛. 𝐶 is the set of FIFO (logical)
communication links over which processes communicate by message
passing. 𝐺 is a complete graph.
The distributed system is assumed to be asynchronous, i.e., there
is no fixed upper bound 𝛿 on the message latency, nor any fixed
upper bound 𝜓 on the relative speeds of processors [33]. In contrast, a
synchronous system has been defined as one in which both 𝛿 and 𝜓 exist
and are known. [33]. A partially synchronous system is an asynchronous
system but with periods of synchrony [33].
We first do not consider the use of digital signatures/ cryptography
in the system model because of the high cost. Then in a separate
section we show results in a model that allows the use of digital
signatures/cryptography.
Let 𝑒𝑥𝑖 , where 𝑥 ≥ 1, denote the 𝑥th event executed by process
𝑝𝑖 . An event may be an internal event, a message send event, or a
message receive event. Let the state of 𝑝𝑖 after 𝑒𝑥𝑖 be denoted 𝑠𝑥𝑖 , where
𝑥 ≥ 1, and let 𝑠0𝑖 be the initial state. The execution at 𝑝𝑖 is the sequence
of alternating events and resulting states, as ⟨𝑠0𝑖 , 𝑒1𝑖 , 𝑠1𝑖 , 𝑒2𝑖 , 𝑠2𝑖 …⟩. The
execution history at 𝑝𝑖 is the finite execution at 𝑝𝑖 up to the current or
most recent or specified local state. The happened before [3] relation,
denoted →, is an irreflexive, asymmetric, and transitive partial order
defined over events in a distributed execution that is used to define
causality.

Definition 4. Byzantine Reliable Multicast (BRM) to group 𝐺 satisfies
the following properties:
1. (Validity:) If a correct process 𝑝𝑖 delivers message 𝑚 from a
correct process 𝑠𝑒𝑛𝑑𝑒𝑟(𝑚) sent to group 𝐺, then 𝑠𝑒𝑛𝑑𝑒𝑟(𝑚) must
have executed send(𝑚, 𝐺) and 𝑝𝑖 ∈ 𝐺.
2. (Self-delivery:) If a correct process executes send(𝑚, 𝐺), then it
eventually delivers 𝑚.
3. (Reliability/Termination:) If a correct process delivers a message
𝑚 from a possibly faulty process, then all correct processes in 𝐺
will eventually deliver 𝑚.
4. (Integrity:) For any message 𝑚, a correct process 𝑝𝑖 delivers 𝑚 at
most once.
5. (No Information Leakage:) No process outside the group 𝐺 sees
the content of 𝑚.
As a unicast has a single destination, the Reliability/Termination
property of BRM does not apply to Byzantine Reliable Unicast (BRU).
As the destination set of a broadcast is the set of all processes, the
No Information Leakage property of BRM does not apply to Byzantine
Reliable Broadcast (BRB).

Definition 1. The happened before relation → on events consists of
the following rules:
1. Program Order: For the sequence of events ⟨𝑒1𝑖 , 𝑒2𝑖 , …⟩ executed
by process 𝑝𝑖 , ∀ 𝑥, 𝑦 such that 𝑥 < 𝑦 we have 𝑒𝑥𝑖 → 𝑒𝑦𝑖 .
2. Message Order: If event 𝑒𝑥𝑖 is a message send event executed at
process 𝑝𝑖 and 𝑒𝑦𝑗 is the corresponding message receive event at
process 𝑝𝑗 , then 𝑒𝑥𝑖 → 𝑒𝑦𝑗 .

𝐵

In our analysis of causality detection under ←←←→,
← we use Byzantine Causal Broadcast (BCB) with operations bco_broadcast() and
bco_deliver(), where BCB is defined as BRB + a property BCO𝐵

Causality based on the Byzantine happened before relation ←←←→
← on
messages sent by and delivered at correct processes [23,25,28], similar
to [22].

3. Transitive Order: If 𝑒 → 𝑒′ ∧ 𝑒′ → 𝑒′′ then 𝑒 → 𝑒′′ .
Definition 2. The causal past of an event 𝑒 is denoted as 𝐶𝑃 (𝑒) and
defined as the set of events that causally precede 𝑒 under →.

• BCO-Causality: for messages 𝑚, 𝑚′ sent at events 𝑒, 𝑒′ , respec𝐵

tively, if 𝑒 ←←←→
← 𝑒′ then no correct process bco_delivers 𝑚′
before 𝑚.

We require an extension of the happened before relation on events
to accommodate the possibility of Byzantine behavior. We present a
partial order on messages called Byzantine happened before, denoted as

3. Problem formulation

𝐵

←←←→,
← defined on the set of all events at correct processes in 𝑃 .
An algorithm to solve the causality determination problem collects
the execution history of each process in the system and derives causal
relations from it. Let 𝐸𝑖 denote the actual execution history at 𝑝𝑖 (which

𝐵

Definition 3. The Byzantine happened before relation ←←←→
← on events
at correct processes consists of the following rules:
3

Parallel Computing 124 (2025) 103136

A. Misra and A.D. Kshemkalyani

was defined as the sequence of alternating events and resulting states)
⋃
and let 𝐸 =
𝑖 {𝐸𝑖 }. (Here the range of 𝑖 is the set of process ids
in 𝑃 ; here and subsequently the range of variables should be clear
from context and is omitted to avoid excessive cluttering.) For any
causality determination algorithm, let 𝐹𝑖 be the execution history at
⋃
𝑝𝑖 as perceived and collected by the algorithm and let 𝐹 = 𝑖 {𝐹𝑖 }. 𝐹
thus denotes the execution history as collected by the algorithm. Let
𝑇 (𝐸) and 𝑇 (𝐹 ) denote the sets of all events in 𝐸 and 𝐹 , respectively.
Analogous to Definitions 1 and 3, we can define the happened before
and Byzantine happened before relations on 𝑇 (𝐹 ) instead of on 𝑇 (𝐸).
Let 𝑒1 → 𝑒2|𝐸 and 𝑒1 → 𝑒2|𝐹 be the evaluation (1 or 0) of 𝑒1 →
𝑒2 using 𝐸 and 𝐹 , respectively. Byzantine processes may corrupt the
collection of 𝐹 to make it different from 𝐸. We assume that a correct
process 𝑝𝑖 needs to determine whether 𝑒𝑥ℎ → 𝑒∗𝑖 holds and 𝑒∗𝑖 is an event
in 𝑇 (𝐸). If 𝑒𝑥ℎ ∉ 𝑇 (𝐸) then 𝑒𝑥ℎ → 𝑒∗𝑖 |𝐸 evaluates to false; note that
𝑒𝑥ℎ → 𝑒∗𝑖 |𝐸 may evaluate to false even if 𝑒𝑥ℎ ∈ 𝑇 (𝐸). If 𝑒𝑥ℎ ∉ 𝑇 (𝐹 ) (or
𝑒∗𝑖 ∉ 𝑇 (𝐹 )) then 𝑒𝑥ℎ → 𝑒∗𝑖 |𝐹 evaluates to false. We assume an oracle
that is used for determining correctness of the causality determination
algorithm; this oracle has access to 𝐸 which can be any execution
history such that 𝑇 (𝐸) ⊇ 𝐶𝑃 (𝑒∗𝑖 ). Byzantine processes may collude as
follows.

1. In 𝐸, we have 𝑒_𝑠𝑐1 → 𝑒_𝑟𝑏 → 𝑒_𝑠𝑏 → 𝑒_𝑟𝑐2 . If 𝐹 at the correct
processes does not match this (specifically, 𝑒_𝑟𝑏 ↛ 𝑒_𝑠𝑏 due
to 𝑝𝑏 lying), a causality detection algorithm fails to recognize
𝑒_𝑠𝑐1 → 𝑒_𝑟𝑐2 , resulting in a false negative.
2. In 𝐸, we have 𝑒_𝑠𝑐1 → 𝑒_𝑟𝑏 , 𝑒_𝑠𝑏 → 𝑒_𝑟𝑐2 , and 𝑒_𝑠𝑏 → 𝑒_𝑟𝑏 . If 𝐹 at
the correct processes does not match this and reflects 𝑒_𝑟𝑏 → 𝑒_𝑠𝑏
(due to 𝑝𝑏 lying), a causality detection algorithm wrongly detects
𝑒_𝑠𝑐1 → 𝑒_𝑟𝑐2 , resulting in a false positive.
Or let 𝑝𝑏1 and 𝑝𝑏2 be Byzantine processes. Let message 𝑚1 sent at 𝑒_𝑠𝑐1
be received at 𝑒_𝑟𝑏1 . Let message 𝑚2 sent at 𝑒_𝑠𝑏2 be received at 𝑒_𝑟𝑐2 .
Consider the following scenarios.
1. In 𝐸, we have 𝑒_𝑠𝑐1 → 𝑒_𝑟𝑏1 → 𝑒_𝑠𝑏1 → 𝑒_𝑟𝑏2 → 𝑒_𝑠𝑏2 → 𝑒_𝑟𝑐2 . If
𝐹 at the correct processes does not match this (specifically, 𝑒_𝑠𝑏1
and 𝑒_𝑟𝑏2 are not revealed due to 𝑝𝑏1 and 𝑝𝑏2 lying), a causality
detection algorithm fails to recognize 𝑒_𝑠𝑐1 → 𝑒_𝑟𝑐2 , resulting in
a false negative.
2. In 𝐸, we have 𝑒_𝑠𝑐1 → 𝑒_𝑟𝑏1 , 𝑒_𝑠𝑏2 → 𝑒_𝑟𝑐2 . If 𝐹 at the correct
processes does not match this and reflects 𝑒_𝑠𝑐1 → 𝑒_𝑟𝑏1 →
𝑒_𝑠𝑏1 → 𝑒_𝑟𝑏2 → 𝑒_𝑠𝑏2 → 𝑒_𝑟𝑐2 (due to 𝑝𝑏1 and 𝑝𝑏2 lying),
a causality detection algorithm wrongly detects 𝑒_𝑠𝑐1 → 𝑒_𝑟𝑐2 ,
resulting in a false positive.

1. To delete 𝑒𝑥ℎ from 𝐹ℎ or in general, record 𝐹 as any alteration of
𝐸 such that 𝑒𝑥ℎ → 𝑒∗𝑖 |𝐹 = 0, while 𝑒𝑥ℎ → 𝑒∗𝑖 |𝐸 = 1, or

Therefore it not sufficient for the correct processes to agree mutually
on a 𝐹 that differs from 𝐸 in what happened in 𝐸 at the Byzantine
processes; their 𝐹𝑗 must also agree with 𝐸𝑗 at all processes 𝑝𝑗 .

2. To add a fake event 𝑒𝑥ℎ in 𝐹ℎ or in general, record 𝐹 as any
alteration of 𝐸 such that 𝑒𝑥ℎ → 𝑒∗𝑖 |𝐹 = 1, while 𝑒𝑥ℎ → 𝑒∗𝑖 |𝐸 = 0.
Without loss of generality, we have that 𝑒𝑥ℎ ∈ 𝑇 (𝐸) ∪ 𝑇 (𝐹 ). Note that 𝑒𝑥ℎ
belongs to 𝑇 (𝐹 ) ⧵ 𝑇 (𝐸) when it is a fake event in 𝐹 .

4. Impossibility and possibility results

Definition 5. The causality determination problem 𝐶𝐷(𝐸, 𝐹 , 𝑒∗𝑖 ) for
any event 𝑒∗𝑖 ∈ 𝑇 (𝐸) at a correct process 𝑝𝑖 is to devise an algorithm to
collect the execution history 𝐸 as 𝐹 at 𝑝𝑖 such that 𝑣𝑎𝑙𝑖𝑑(𝐹 ) = 1, where
{
1 if ∀𝑒𝑥ℎ , 𝑒𝑥ℎ → 𝑒∗𝑖 |𝐸 = 𝑒𝑥ℎ → 𝑒∗𝑖 |𝐹
𝑣𝑎𝑙𝑖𝑑(𝐹 ) =
0 otherwise

4.1. Two basic results
Theorem 1. It is impossible to prevent false negatives in solving the causality determination problem (Definition 5) as specified by CD(𝐸, 𝐹 , 𝑒∗𝑖 ) in
an asynchronous unicast/multicast/broadcast-based message passing system
with one or more Byzantine processes.

When 1 is returned, the algorithm output matches God’s truth and
solves CD correctly. Thus, returning 1 indicates that the problem has
been solved correctly by the algorithm using 𝐹 . 0 is returned if one of
the following two cases holds.

Proof. In the determination of 𝑒𝑥ℎ → 𝑒∗𝑖 , a false negative may arise
when a send-receive event pair (𝑒𝑢𝑓 , 𝑒𝑣𝑔 ) in a causal chain from 𝑒𝑥ℎ to
𝑒∗𝑖 is missing as per 𝐹 . The causal chain has the following subsequence:
′
′
′
⟨⋯ 𝑒𝑢𝑓 , 𝑒𝑣𝑔 , 𝑒𝑣𝑔 ⋯⟩, where 𝑒𝑣𝑔 is a send event at 𝑝𝑔 . Both 𝑒𝑣𝑔 and 𝑒𝑣𝑔 are local
to 𝑝𝑔 . A Byzantine 𝑝𝑔 can suppress letting the rest of the system know
′
of the occurrence of 𝑒𝑣𝑔 or swap the order of occurrence of 𝑒𝑣𝑔 and 𝑒𝑣𝑔
in what it lets the rest of the system know about the occurrence of the
two local events. Both actions have the effect of breaking the causality
chain from 𝑒𝑥ℎ to 𝑒∗𝑖 which can give rise to a false negative. □

• ∃𝑒𝑥ℎ such that 𝑒𝑥ℎ → 𝑒∗𝑖 |𝐸 = 1 ∧ 𝑒𝑥ℎ → 𝑒∗𝑖 |𝐹 = 0 (denoting a false
negative, abbreviated 𝐹 𝑁).
• ∃𝑒𝑥ℎ such that 𝑒𝑥ℎ → 𝑒∗𝑖 |𝐸 = 0 ∧ 𝑒𝑥ℎ → 𝑒∗𝑖 |𝐹 = 1 (denoting a false
positive, abbreviated 𝐹 𝑃 ).
In order to determine whether CD is solved correctly, we have to
evaluate ∀𝑒𝑥ℎ , 𝑒𝑥ℎ → 𝑒∗𝑖 |𝐸 = 𝑒𝑥ℎ → 𝑒∗𝑖 |𝐹 even if 𝑒𝑥ℎ ∈ (𝑇 (𝐸) ∪ 𝑇 (𝐹 )) ⧵ 𝑇 (𝐸)
because such an 𝑒𝑥ℎ is recorded by the algorithm as part of 𝐹 . We make
the following crucial observation: in CD, a single Byzantine process 𝑝𝑏
can cause 𝐹 (as recorded by the algorithm) to be different from 𝐸.
This is not just a mismatch between 𝐸𝑏 and 𝐹𝑏 at 𝑝𝑏 but also at other
processes, and also a mismatch between other 𝐸𝑎 and 𝐹𝑎 at processes
𝑝𝑐 , by contaminating 𝐹𝑏 and/or 𝐹𝑎 via direct and transitive message
passing (across different messages) originated at or passing through 𝑝𝑏 .

Another reason why false negatives cannot be prevented is that a
Byzantine process pair may collude in performing out-of-band communication with each other. Such an out-of-band send-receive event pair
(𝑒𝑢𝑓 , 𝑒𝑣𝑔 ) does establish a causal chain from 𝑒𝑥ℎ to 𝑒∗𝑖 by the composition
of 𝑒𝑥ℎ → 𝑒𝑢𝑓 , 𝑒𝑢𝑓 → 𝑒𝑣𝑔 , and 𝑒𝑣𝑔 → 𝑒∗𝑖 , that is missing as per 𝐹 because
𝑒𝑢𝑓 → 𝑒𝑣𝑔 is not recorded by the algorithm — it is not detectable outside
the subsystem of the Byzantine processes if they choose not to disclose
it.
We also have the following result about internal events at a process.

• A FN arises because a send-receive event pair (𝑒𝑢𝑓 , 𝑒𝑣𝑔 ) of 𝐸 in a
causal chain from 𝑒𝑥ℎ to 𝑒∗𝑖 is missing as per 𝐹 . In addition, a FN
may arise if 𝑒𝑥ℎ ∈ 𝑇 (𝐸) ⧵ 𝑇 (𝐹 ).

Theorem 2. For an internal event 𝑒𝑥ℎ , it is impossible to prevent false
negatives or false positives in determining 𝑒𝑥ℎ → 𝑒∗𝑖 at a correct process 𝑝𝑖
in an asynchronous message passing system with one or more Byzantine
processes.

• A FP arises because a non-existent send-receive message pair
(𝑒𝑢𝑓 , 𝑒𝑣𝑔 ) in 𝐸 appears in a causal chain from 𝑒𝑥ℎ to 𝑒∗𝑖 as per 𝐹 .
In addition, a FP may arise if 𝑒𝑥ℎ ∈ 𝑇 (𝐹 ) ⧵ 𝑇 (𝐸).

Proof. There may be no other event in the rest of the system to corroborate the occurrence of an internal event at a process. A Byzantine
process 𝑝ℎ can choose to not reveal about an internal event 𝑒𝑥ℎ to the
rest of the system, leading to a false negative that cannot be prevented.
It may also choose to add a fake internal event 𝑒𝑥ℎ in what it reveals
to the rest of the system, leading to a false positive that cannot be
prevented. □

Byzantine processes are an integral part of the system. The occurrence of an event at such a process, and its correct order with respect to
other events locally, matters to correct processes because it can impact
the causality relation among events at correct processes. Let 𝑝𝑐1 and 𝑝𝑐2
be correct processes and let 𝑝𝑏 be a Byzantine process. Let message 𝑚1
sent at 𝑒_𝑠𝑐1 be received at 𝑒_𝑟𝑏 . Let message 𝑚2 sent at 𝑒_𝑠𝑏 be received
at 𝑒_𝑟𝑐2 . Consider the following scenarios.
4

Parallel Computing 124 (2025) 103136

A. Misra and A.D. Kshemkalyani

In light of Theorem 2, we implicitly prove our impossibility or
possibility results on the CD problem considering only send and receive
events in 𝐸 and 𝐹 .

Solving Black_Box at 𝑝𝑖 requires identifying the set of correct processes and solving 𝐶𝐷. In order for any algorithm to correctly solve
CD (Definition 5), it must ensure that the collected execution history
𝐹 (containing execution histories of potentially Byzantine processes)
matches 𝐸, and this requires identifying all Byzantine processes as we
prove next. From this it will follow that Black_Box ⪯ CD.
For 𝐹 to match 𝐸, the following must hold.

4.2. Results for ‘‘happened before’’
A main contribution in our results is relating the causality determination problem to the well-known Consensus problem [29,30]. In the
Consensus problem, each process has an initial value and all correct
processes must agree on a single value. The solution needs to satisfy
the following three conditions.1

• (Managing false positives:) A Byzantine process may attempt to
insert a fake entry in 𝐹ℎ (based on a fake send-receive event
pair) and contaminate the reporting of histories in 𝐹 , leading
to a false positive. Therefore, there needs to be a mechanism
to prevent contamination of 𝐹 or filter out the malicious entries from 𝐹 within bounded time. However, due to unicasting,
message privacy needs to be maintained. Note that we are not
considering the use of cryptography. Hence a message send event
in 𝐹ℎ from a potentially Byzantine 𝑝ℎ to a potentially Byzantine 𝑝𝑔
cannot be verified within bounded time by other processes while
collecting the reported execution history as the message itself
cannot be broadcast or communicated to any process other than
𝑝𝑔 to maintain its privacy. No bound on the time period exists
because 𝑝ℎ may be Byzantine and because there is no upper bound
on the message latency. (After event 𝑒∗𝑖 , process 𝑝𝑖 can try to
verify with 𝑝ℎ whether the entry in 𝐹ℎ is genuine or fake but this
may not conclude in bounded time; if treated as genuine, a fake
send-receive event pair introduces a false positive and if treated
as fake, a genuine send-receive event pair introduces a false
negative. Furthermore, if both 𝑝ℎ and 𝑝𝑔 are Byzantine, a fake
event in 𝐹ℎ can appear as genuine to 𝑝𝑖 despite any verification
attempts.) Therefore identification of Byzantine processes, their
actual execution histories, and causal chains from and through
them is required.
• (Managing false negatives:) Consider a message 𝑚 sent at 𝑒𝑥ℎ from
𝑝ℎ to 𝑝𝑔 in 𝐸ℎ . During the collection of 𝐸ℎ to 𝑝𝑖 for reporting 𝐹ℎ ,
Byzantine processes may delete information about 𝑒𝑥ℎ and 𝑚 from
𝐹ℎ , leading to a false negative when 𝑒𝑥ℎ → 𝑒∗𝑖 . Further by Theorem
1, a false negative may occur if the receive event of 𝑚 by 𝑝𝑔 is
not disclosed to the rest of the system by a Byzantine 𝑝𝑔 or if
the receive event is swapped after a subsequent send event by 𝑝𝑔
that is part of the causality chain 𝑒𝑥ℎ → 𝑒∗𝑖 , in what 𝑝𝑔 discloses
to the rest of the system thereby breaking the causality chain of
𝐸 in 𝐹 . Therefore, either deletion of information from 𝐸 in 𝐹 or
alteration of 𝐸 in 𝐹 has to be prevented, or such deletions and
alterations from 𝐸 when presented with 𝐹 have to be recognized
within bounded time. This requires identification of the Byzantine
processes, their actual execution histories, and causal chains from
and through them.

• Agreement: All non-faulty processes must agree on the same
single value.
• Validity: If all non-faulty processes have the same initial value,
then the agreed-on value by all the non-faulty processes must be
that same value.
• Termination: Each non-faulty process must eventually decide on
a value.
According to the FLP impossibility result [35], it is impossible to solve
Consensus in an asynchronous message-passing system with even a
single crash failure prone process. We show a reduction from Consensus
to CD in Byzantine systems to prove the impossibility of solving CD in
a system with Byzantine failures. This proves that CD is at least as hard
as Consensus in Byzantine systems. Of related but orthogonal interest,
we also later show that CD does not reduce to Consensus in a Byzantine
system, i.e., a solution to Consensus cannot be used to solve CD in such
a system, thus establishing that CD is harder to solve than Consensus.
Theorem 3. It is impossible to solve causality determination (Definition
5) as specified by CD(𝐸, 𝐹 , 𝑒∗𝑖 ) in an asynchronous unicast-based message
passing system with one or more Byzantine processes.
Proof. We prove the impossibility of solving the CD problem in two
steps.
1. We give a reduction (denoted ⪯) from Black_Box to CD, where
Black_Box is defined below.
2. We also give a reduction from the Consensus problem (which
by the FLP result [35] is unsolvable in the presence of a single
Byzantine process) to the Black_Box problem.
We then transitively compose these two reductions. In more detail, after
showing how Consensus can be solved by invoking a black box that
solves Black_Box, and how Black_Box can be solved by solving CD, we
argue as follows. If CD were solvable, Black_Box would be solvable, and
then Consensus would also be solvable; however, that contradicts the
unsolvability of Consensus. Therefore, there cannot exist any algorithm
to solve CD.
The definition of the Black_Box problem is as follows.
Black_Box(𝑉 , 𝐸, 𝐹 , 𝑒∗𝑖 ) executed at 𝑝𝑖 takes as input a vector 𝑉 of initial
boolean values, one per process, 𝐸, 𝐹 , and local event 𝑒∗𝑖 at a process
𝑝𝑖 . Black_Box invoked at 𝑝𝑖 acts as follows. The correct process 𝑝𝑖
broadcasts the value 𝑤 where:
⎧0
⎪
𝑤 = ⎨1
⎪𝐶𝐷(𝐸, 𝐹 , 𝑒∗ )
𝑖
⎩

If there were an algorithm to make 𝐹 match 𝐸, it requires identifying
whether each of the processes that input their execution histories is correct
or Byzantine, and tracing and dealing with/resolving the impact of contamination via message passing by the Byzantine processes from and through
those Byzantine processes on the execution histories of processes at other
processes. Thus, Black_Box ⪯ CD.
Now we give the reduction from Consensus to Black_Box. To solve
Consensus(𝑉 ) at (a correct process) 𝑝𝑖 , we invoke Black_Box(𝑉 , 𝐸, 𝐹 , 𝑒∗𝑖 )
locally (and likewise to solve Consensus(𝑉 ) at (each process) 𝑝𝑗 , invoke Black_Box(𝑉 , 𝐸, 𝐹 , 𝑒∗𝑗 ) at each 𝑝𝑗 ). Each correct process computes
min(𝐿) from the locally returned list 𝐿 and outputs as its consensus
value the broadcast value that it receives from 𝑝min(𝐿) and terminates.
The conditions of Consensus – Agreement, Validity, and Termination –
can be seen to be satisfied. So Consensus ⪯ Black_Box.
If CD is (correctly) solvable, it returns 1 for ∀𝑒𝑥ℎ , 𝑒𝑥ℎ → 𝑒∗𝑖 |𝐸 = 𝑒𝑥ℎ →
𝑒∗𝑖 |𝐹 , (and implicitly for all 𝑒∗𝑖 ). This gives:

if each correct 𝑝𝑗 has 𝑉 [𝑗] = 0
if each correct 𝑝𝑗 has 𝑉 [𝑗] = 1
otherwise

and locally returns 𝐿, a list of ids of correct processes. Solving Black_Box
requires identifying the set of correct processes; we do not claim
Black_Box is solvable.

1
In some literature, Conservation, which requires the sum of the initial
values to equal the sum of the final values, is co-specified [34]. However, in
general Consensus is independent of Conservation.

𝐶𝑜𝑛𝑠𝑒𝑛𝑠𝑢𝑠 ⪯ 𝐵𝑙𝑎𝑐𝑘_𝐵𝑜𝑥 ⪯ 𝐶𝐷.
5

Parallel Computing 124 (2025) 103136

A. Misra and A.D. Kshemkalyani

the causality chain 𝑒𝑥ℎ → 𝑒∗𝑖 , in what 𝑝𝑔 discloses to the rest of the
system thereby breaking the causality chain of 𝐸 in 𝐹 . To prevent
such false negatives, Byzantine processes, their actual execution
histories, and causal chains from and through such processes need
to be identified.
Note that in the bullet above regarding prevention of false positives, if 𝑚 is not delivered to 𝑝𝑔 within the time to report 𝐹 , the
entry about sending of 𝑚 is not added to 𝐹ℎ even though 𝑚 might
have been sent. However the message 𝑚′ carrying information
about sending of 𝑚 is considered received/delivered, and hence
𝑒𝑥ℎ → 𝑒∗𝑖 . So this scenario contributes to a false negative.

Transitivity of reductions implies that if the CD problem is solvable,
then Consensus is also solvable. However, that contradicts the FLP
impossibility result [35] when applied to a Byzantine system, hence
CD cannot be solvable. □
When the communication pattern is by broadcasts, the proof analyzing the CD problem uses Byzantine Reliable Broadcast (BRB) [36,37]
as a layer beneath the broadcast invocation. Without loss of generality,
this proof considers the strongest form of broadcast that gives the
highest resilience to Byzantine behavior, namely BRB. BRB requires
that the number of Byzantine processes 𝑡 be such that 𝑛 > 3𝑡. BRB
is an instantiation of Definition 4 having 𝐺 = 𝑃 and without the No
Information Leakage Property, and satisfies the following properties.

Thus, to solve CD, it is necessary to identify Byzantine processes, their
actual execution histories, and causal chains from and through them. So
we have Black_Box ⪯ CD and, as Consensus ⪯ Black_Box, hence Consensus
⪯ CD. As Consensus is unsolvable in a system with Byzantine processes,
CD is also unsolvable. □

• Validity: If a correct process delivers a message 𝑚 from a correct
process 𝑝𝑠 , then 𝑝𝑠 must have executed broadcast(𝑚).
• Self-delivery: If a correct process executes broadcast(𝑚), then it
eventually executes deliver(𝑚).
• Integrity: For any message 𝑚, a correct process executes
deliver(𝑚) at most once.
• Reliability (or Termination): If a correct process executes
deliver(𝑚), then every other correct process also (eventually)
executes deliver(𝑚).

When processes communicate by multicasting, each send event
sends a message to a group 𝐺 consisting of processes in a subset of
𝑃 . Different send events can send to different subsets of processes in 𝑃 .
The number of possible groups is 2|𝑃 | − 1. Communicating via unicasts
and communicating via broadcasts are special cases of multicasting.

Theorem 4. It is impossible to solve causality determination (Definition
5) as specified by CD(𝐸, 𝐹 , 𝑒∗𝑖 ) in an asynchronous broadcast-based message
passing system with one or more Byzantine processes.

Theorem 5. It is impossible to solve causality determination (Definition
5) as specified by CD(𝐸, 𝐹 , 𝑒∗𝑖 ) in an asynchronous multicast-based message
passing system with one or more Byzantine processes.

Proof. The overall structure of the proof is along the lines of that for
Theorem 3. We outline the logic that CD (Definition 5) cannot be solved
for when the underlying send events are broadcasts. Specifically, we
show that 𝐹 cannot be made to match 𝐸.

Proof. Unicast mode of communication is a special case of multicast
where each group is of size 1 (or 2 if the sender is included in the
multicast group). Theorem 3 proved that causality determination in the
presence of even a single Byzantine process under unicast communication is impossible to solve. As the special case of group size 1 (or 2) is
not solvable, the general case of multicast is also not solvable. □

• (Managing false positives:) By doing broadcasts using the Byzantine
Reliable Broadcast (BRB) [36,37] layer, false positives can be
prevented by ensuring no fake events/ causal dependencies are
added to 𝐹 . Consider the case that a Byzantine process 𝑝𝑏 attempts
to insert a fake entry about broadcast of 𝑚 by 𝑝ℎ in 𝐹ℎ (whether
ℎ = 𝑏 or ℎ ≠ 𝑏) at a correct process 𝑝𝑔 via a message 𝑚′ sent to
𝑝𝑔 . As broadcasts are sent over the underlying BRB, 𝑝𝑔 can verify
whether or not this insertion is valid — based on the Reliability
(or Termination) property of BRB, 𝑚 must get delivered by the
BRB layer at all correct processes including 𝑝𝑔 if the insertion is
valid. Only if 𝑚 is delivered to 𝑝𝑔 is authenticity of 𝑚 verified
and the entry about 𝑚 can be inserted in 𝐹ℎ . Now in particular,
𝑝𝑔 may be 𝑝𝑖 because it is correct. Therefore, correct processes
including 𝑝𝑖 have a mechanism to prevent fake send events (and
their corresponding fake receive events) from being inserted in 𝐹 ,
ensuring no false positives.
A fake receive event 𝑟ℎ for message 𝑚 cannot be inserted in 𝐹ℎ at
𝑝𝑔 , using the mechanism outlined next. 𝑟ℎ is included as a causal
dependency on the next broadcast by 𝑝ℎ and only on the receipt of
such a broadcast by 𝑝𝑔 is 𝑝𝑔 allowed to include 𝑟ℎ in 𝐹ℎ at 𝑝𝑔 . This
inclusion is done only if the send event of 𝑚 can be verified by 𝑝𝑔
using BRB. 𝑝ℎ could learn of 𝑟ℎ by receiving 𝑚 (or information of
𝑚 from a colluding Byzantine 𝑝𝑘 that has received 𝑚). If multiple
identical 𝑟ℎ are reported to 𝑝𝑔 , the first is included in 𝐹ℎ .

4.3. Results for ‘‘Byzantine happened before’’
The CD problem (Definition 5) defined in terms of the → relation
𝐵

is now redefined in terms of the ←←←→
← relation for the correctness criteria
for causality determination.
𝐵

From Definition 3, we have that 𝑒 ←←←→
← 𝑒′ is equivalent to (𝑒 → 𝑒′ ∧
there is a causal path from event 𝑒 to event 𝑒′ going through correct processes
𝐵

𝐵

𝐵

in the execution). We define 𝑒 ←←←→
← 𝑒′ |𝐸 and 𝑒 ←←←→
← 𝑒′ |𝐹 as follows. 𝑒 ←←←→
← 𝑒′ |𝐸
is defined as (𝑒 → 𝑒′ |𝐸 ∧ there is a causal path from 𝑒 to 𝑒′ going through
𝐵

correct processes in the execution). 𝑒 ←←←→
← 𝑒′ |𝐹 is defined as (𝑒 → 𝑒′ |𝐹 ∧
there is a causal path from 𝑒 to 𝑒′ going through correct processes in the
𝐵

execution). Note that evaluating 𝑒 ←←←→
← 𝑒′ |𝐹 does not involve determining
whether there actually exists the causal path going through correct
processes; also the process at which 𝑒′ occurs does not know that the
process at which 𝑒 occurs is correct.
Definition 6. The causality determination problem 𝐶𝐷_𝐵(𝐸, 𝐹 , 𝑒∗𝑖 ) for
any event 𝑒∗𝑖 ∈ 𝑇 (𝐸) at a correct process 𝑝𝑖 is to devise an algorithm
to collect the execution history 𝐸 as 𝐹 at 𝑝𝑖 such that 𝑣𝑎𝑙𝑖𝑑_𝐵(𝐹 ) = 1,
where
{
𝐵
𝐵
𝑥 𝑥 ← 𝑒∗ | = 𝑒𝑥 ←←←→
← 𝑒∗𝑖 |𝐹
𝑖 𝐸
ℎ
𝑣𝑎𝑙𝑖𝑑_𝐵(𝐹 ) = 1 if ∀𝑒ℎ , 𝑒ℎ ←←←→
0 otherwise

• (Managing false negatives:) However, a Byzantine process 𝑝𝑔 can
delete from 𝐹𝑔 information about a broadcast of 𝑚 by 𝑝ℎ at 𝑒𝑥ℎ
that it has received, despite doing broadcasts using the BRB layer.
Even if 𝑒𝑥ℎ → 𝑒∗𝑖 where the causality chain passes through a
message broadcast event subsequently at 𝑝𝑔 after receiving 𝑚, 𝑝𝑖
has no way of knowing about this chain or about the receive event
of 𝑚 at 𝑝𝑔 if 𝑝𝑔 so chooses. Further by Theorem 1, a false negative
may occur if the receive event of 𝑚 by 𝑝𝑔 is not disclosed to the
rest of the system by a Byzantine 𝑝𝑔 or if the receive event is
swapped after a subsequent broadcast event by 𝑝𝑔 that is part of

The problem is solved correctly iff 1 is returned. Value 0 is returned
if one of the following two cases holds.
• ∃𝑒𝑥ℎ such that 𝑒𝑥ℎ → 𝑒∗𝑖 |𝐸 = 1 ∧ 𝑒𝑥ℎ → 𝑒∗𝑖 |𝐹 = 0 ∧ there exists a causal
path from 𝑒𝑥ℎ to 𝑒∗𝑖 going through correct processes (denoting a false
𝐵

negative under ←←←→,
← abbreviated 𝐹 𝑁𝐵 ).
6

Parallel Computing 124 (2025) 103136

A. Misra and A.D. Kshemkalyani

• ∃𝑒𝑥ℎ such that 𝑒𝑥ℎ → 𝑒∗𝑖 |𝐸 = 0 ∧ 𝑒𝑥ℎ → 𝑒∗𝑖 |𝐹 = 1 ∧ there exists a causal
path from 𝑒𝑥ℎ to 𝑒∗𝑖 going through correct processes (denoting a false

because knowing it requires identifying each process as being either
Byzantine or non-Byzantine. All it can be used for is to guarantee that if

positive under ←←←→,
← abbreviated 𝐹 𝑃𝐵 ). This case cannot occur as
the first and third terms cannot both be true. Hence 𝐹 𝑃𝐵 cannot
occur.

the ←←←→
← relation holds, then it is possible to determine causality between
the corresponding two events.

𝐵

𝐵

Theorem 8. It is impossible to solve causality determination (Definition 6)
Theorem 6.

𝐵

It is possible to solve causality determination (Definition 6)

as specified by CD_B(𝐸, 𝐹 , 𝑒∗𝑖 ), now defined in terms of the ←←←→
← relation, in
an asynchronous multicast-based message passing system with one or more
Byzantine processes.

𝐵
as specified by CD_B(𝐸, 𝐹 , 𝑒∗𝑖 ), now defined in terms of the ←←←→
← relation, in

an asynchronous unicast-based message passing system with one or more
Byzantine processes.

Proof. The properties of BRM cannot be satisfied without doing
BRB within multicast group 𝐺, where 𝑡𝐺 < |𝐺|∕3 and 𝑡𝐺 is the
number of Byzantine processes within group 𝐺. However to satisfy
this condition for (multiple) groups implicitly requires identifying the
Byzantine processes, which is not possible. Therefore, since BRM is
impossible to achieve (without cryptography), detecting causality over
Byzantine Reliable Multicast is also impossible to achieve. Hence we
say technically that false positives and false negatives can occur under

Proof. A process sends a unicast via a point-to-point message, satisfying the properties of BRU.
• (Managing false positives:) Let each process 𝑝𝑗 be responsible for
adding its local history in the 𝐹𝑗 at other processes. This can
be achieved by doing a broadcast, simulated as point-to-point
messages, after an application unicast send event, of control information about the application unicast send event’s ID and other
local (internal and receive) events’ IDs since the previous such
simulated broadcast. The local histories of the correct processes
will be correctly recorded in 𝐹 at 𝑝𝑖 ; no Byzantine processes can
cause deletion of or addition to this information. Thus, if there
are no Byzantine processes along some causal path from 𝑒𝑥ℎ to

𝐵

←←←→,
← even though, by definition, false positives cannot occur as discussed
earlier.
However, if a multicast is done via point-to-point messages, without
satisfying BRM properties, then 𝐹 𝑃𝐵 and 𝐹 𝑁𝐵 can be prevented based
on Theorem 6. □

𝐵

𝑒∗𝑖 , 𝑒𝑥ℎ ←←←→
← 𝑒∗𝑖 will be correctly detected at 𝑝𝑖 . Thus, false positives

Section 4.3.2 gives an algorithm for 𝐹 𝑃𝐵 and 𝐹 𝑁𝐵 for unicasts
satisfying BRU and for multicasts without satisfying BRM.

𝐵

under ←←←→
← can be prevented and hence 𝐹 𝑃𝐵 .
• (Managing false negatives:) Consider a message 𝑚 from correct
process 𝑝ℎ to 𝑝𝑔 sent at 𝑒𝑥ℎ in 𝐸ℎ . During the collection of 𝐸ℎ
to 𝑝𝑖 for reporting 𝐹ℎ , if there are no Byzantine processes along
some causal path from 𝑒𝑥ℎ to 𝑒∗𝑖 , it is possible to ensure by faithful
propagation of causal dependency information along that path
that no Byzantine processes can cause deletion of information
about 𝑒𝑥ℎ from 𝐹ℎ or about other events in 𝐹 that can negate
𝐵

4.3.1. Algorithm outline for CD_B of Byzantine happened before under
broadcasts
Each process 𝑝𝑖 maintains 𝐹𝑧 (∀𝑧) in which it tracks 𝑝𝑧 ’s execution
history. The goal is to make 𝐹𝑧 match 𝐸𝑧 for correct 𝑝𝑧 , at each 𝑝𝑖 .
𝐵

• Byzantine Causal Broadcast (BCB) [22] defined using the ←←←→
← relation on messages sent by correct processes [23,25,28], is run over
Byzantine Reliable Broadcast (BRB) [36,37]. The 𝑎th broadcast
by 𝑝𝑖 of message 𝑚 is denoted (𝑚, 𝑖, 𝑎) and is done by invoking
BCB(𝑚, 𝑖, 𝑎, 𝑖𝑛𝑐_ℎ𝑖𝑠𝑡) where 𝑖𝑛𝑐_ℎ𝑖𝑠𝑡 is the local incremental history
since its last broadcast (𝑎 − 1). For the delivery event of a message
𝑚′ in 𝑖𝑛𝑐_ℎ𝑖𝑠𝑡, 𝑝𝑖 also includes entry (𝑚′ , 𝑗, 𝑏), where 𝑚′ was delivered locally by the BCB layer at 𝑝𝑖 and it was the 𝑏th broadcast
by 𝑝𝑗 .

𝐵

𝑒𝑥ℎ ←←←→
← 𝑒∗𝑖 . Thus, false negatives under ←←←→
← can be prevented and
hence 𝐹 𝑁𝐵 .
The theorem follows.
Theorem 7.

□

It is possible to solve causality determination (Definition 6)
𝐵

as specified by CD_B(𝐸, 𝐹 , 𝑒∗𝑖 ), now defined in terms of the ←←←→
← relation, in
an asynchronous broadcast-based message passing system with one or more
Byzantine processes.

• When 𝑝𝑘 BCB-delivers message (𝑚, 𝑖, 𝑎, 𝑖𝑛𝑐_ℎ𝑖𝑠𝑡), 𝑝𝑘 verifies
whether each (𝑚′ , 𝑗, 𝑏) corresponding to a delivery event in the
received 𝑖𝑛𝑐_ℎ𝑖𝑠𝑡 has already been locally BCB-delivered. It should
have been delivered by the causal order property of the BCB layer
via a previously executed BCB-deliver, if it is not a fake entry in
𝑖𝑛𝑐_ℎ𝑖𝑠𝑡; if it has not been BCB-delivered locally, 𝑝𝑖 is a Byzantine
process trying to enter a fake entry (about a receive event of
message (𝑚′ , 𝑗, 𝑏)) which is to be ignored. This prevents false
positives. (Any event executed by a Byzantine 𝑝𝑖 can be ignored

Proof. The proof structure is similar to that of Theorems 4, 6. Similar
to Theorem 4, we assume that a broadcast is sent via BRB. We outline
𝐵

the logic that CD_B (Definition 6 with → replaced by ←←←→)
← can be solved
when the underlying send events are broadcasts.
• (Managing false positives:) False positives cannot occur. Same reasoning as in the first bullet in Theorem 4 (thus 𝐹 𝑃 holds and it
implies 𝐹 𝑃𝐵 ) or similar to that in the first bullet of Theorem 6.
In fact, by the second bullet after Definition 6, 𝐹 𝑃𝐵 .
• (Managing false negatives:) False negatives cannot occur. Similar
reasoning as in the second bullet of Theorem 6. Let a message 𝑚
be broadcast at 𝑒𝑥ℎ . During the collection of 𝐸ℎ to 𝑝𝑖 for reporting

𝐵

because it is not considered by the definition of ←←←→.)
←
For each
(𝑚′ , 𝑗, 𝑏) that has been BCB-delivered locally the corresponding
receive/deliver event at 𝑝𝑖 and internal events at 𝑝𝑖 up to the send
event for (𝑚, 𝑖, 𝑎) in 𝑖𝑛𝑐_ℎ𝑖𝑠𝑡 at 𝑝𝑖 and the send event for (𝑚, 𝑖, 𝑎) are
inserted in 𝐹𝑖 at 𝑝𝑘 . Note that the BCB layer delivers a message
(𝑚, 𝑖, 𝑎, 𝑖𝑛𝑐_ℎ𝑖𝑠𝑡) only when all the causal dependencies in its causal
barrier have been BCB-delivered (as they must be delivered by the
BRB layer at 𝑝𝑘 if they are not fake) but 𝑖𝑛𝑐_ℎ𝑖𝑠𝑡 sent by 𝑝𝑖 may
contain a fake entry about an older delivery event for (𝑚′ , 𝑗, 𝑏) that
has dropped out of the causal barrier [22]. Hence this verification
by 𝑝𝑘 is done.

𝐵

𝐹ℎ , if 𝑒𝑥ℎ ←←←→
← 𝑒∗𝑖 there are no Byzantine processes along some causal
path from 𝑒𝑥ℎ to 𝑒∗𝑖 , hence it is possible to ensure that no Byzantine
process can cause deletion of information of 𝑒𝑥ℎ from 𝐹ℎ or of other
𝐵

events in 𝐹 that can negate 𝑒𝑥ℎ ←←←→
← 𝑒∗𝑖 . Both 𝐹 𝑁𝐵 and 𝐹 𝑁 hold.

□

It follows that to solve CD_B under unicasts and broadcasts, it is not
necessary to identify whether each process is Byzantine. As a result,
Black_Box  CD_B and hence Consensus  CD_B.
Although Theorems 6, 7 are positive results, in practice it is not

𝐵

• False negatives while determining 𝑒𝑥ℎ ←←←→
← 𝑒∗𝑖 at 𝑝𝑖 cannot occur as
Byzantine processes cannot modify/delete events from the causal
histories reported by correct processes via broadcasting.

𝐵

possible to know whether the ←←←→
← relation holds between 𝑒𝑥ℎ and 𝑒∗𝑖
7

Parallel Computing 124 (2025) 103136

A. Misra and A.D. Kshemkalyani

The above logic can be seen to be correct due to the properties of
the BRB layer, on top of which the BCB layer is run and invoked while
doing an application-layer broadcast. We now have that for a correct
process 𝑝𝑖 :

encrypted by a group key other than that for 𝐺 (by a Byzantine
sender 𝑝ℎ ) and hence the decrypted 𝑚 is garbage, a correct 𝑝𝑏
ignores it, but a Byzantine 𝑝𝑏 may still include the send event
of 𝑚 (i.e., of 𝐶𝑚 ) on a later message 𝑚′ (i.e., 𝐶𝑚′ ) it sends. We
treat the dependency of 𝐶𝑚 preceding 𝐶𝑚′ at 𝑝𝑏 as valid or true
if we ignore the semantics of the content of 𝑚 which is private
to the sender 𝑝ℎ of 𝑚 and members of 𝐺. (If the semantics of the
message matters, this is a fake dependency being introduced by
𝑝𝑏 .) This dependency is never valid and a non-Byzantine 𝑝𝑏 will
never include this dependency.
2. 𝑝𝑏 ∉ 𝐺: (a) If 𝑝𝑏 is correct, there is no receive event at the
application and 𝑝𝑏 does not include the send event of 𝐶𝑚 on any
later message. (b) A Byzantine 𝑝𝑏 may include the send event of
𝐶𝑚 on a later message 𝑚′ it sends in order to introduce a fake
causal dependency of 𝐶𝑚 preceding 𝐶𝑚′ but as other (correct)
processes learn via the BRB of (𝐺, 𝐶𝑚 ) that 𝑝𝑏 ∉ 𝐺, they will not
be tricked into adding this fake dependency of 𝐶𝑚 before 𝐶𝑚′ . (c)
If both sender 𝑝ℎ and receiver 𝑝𝑏 are Byzantine and 𝑝ℎ shared
the group key with 𝑝𝑏 even though 𝑝𝑏 ∉ 𝐺, 𝐶𝑚 is decryptable
by 𝑝𝑏 and there is a dependency from 𝑝ℎ to 𝑝𝑏 . As 𝑝𝑏 ∉ 𝐺,
no other correct process will be able to verify this dependency,
resulting in a false negative. The dependency and the resulting
false negative is due to out-of-band communication.

𝐵

𝑒𝑥ℎ ←←←→
← 𝑒∗𝑖 ⟺ 𝑒𝑥ℎ exists in 𝐹ℎ at 𝑝𝑖 .
Additionally, 𝑒𝑥ℎ in 𝐹ℎ at 𝑝𝑖 implies 𝑒𝑥ℎ → 𝑒∗𝑖 when 𝑒𝑥ℎ is a send or
receive event. This is because a Byzantine process 𝑝𝑏 cannot insert fake
send and receive events 𝑒𝑦𝑏 in 𝐹𝑏 at a correct process 𝑝𝑖 (follows from
Theorem 4). Note that a Byzantine process can delete an actual internal
event as well as insert a fake internal event (follows from Theorem 2).
4.3.2. Algorithm outline for CD_B of Byzantine happened before under
unicasts (and under multicasts without satisfying BRM)
Unicasts are sent point-to-point, satisfying BRU. (Multicasts are sent
point-to-point without satisfying BRM.) After sending the unicast/multicast, the sender does BCB(𝑒𝑥ℎ _𝑖𝑑, 𝑖, 𝑎, 𝐺, 𝑖𝑛𝑐_ℎ𝑖𝑠𝑡) over BRB of control
information only. The BCB over BRB is like in Section 4.3.1; however
(a) the event identifier 𝑒𝑥ℎ _𝑖𝑑 of the send event is used instead of the
message 𝑚 that was sent via BRB to 𝐺, (b) 𝑖𝑛𝑐_ℎ𝑖𝑠𝑡 also specifies event
identifiers, not actual events or messages, and (c) for the receive event
ID 𝑒𝑧𝑖 _𝑖𝑑 in 𝑖𝑛𝑐_ℎ𝑖𝑠𝑡, the event ID of the corresponding send event 𝑒𝑤
𝑗 is
𝑥
used as (𝑒𝑤
𝑗 _𝑖𝑑, 𝑗, 𝑏). On BCB-delivery of (𝑒ℎ _𝑖𝑑, 𝑖, 𝑎, 𝐺, 𝑖𝑛𝑐_ℎ𝑖𝑠𝑡) at 𝑝𝑘 , 𝑝𝑘
inserts 𝑖𝑛𝑐_ℎ𝑖𝑠𝑡 in 𝐹𝑖 at 𝑝𝑘 ; each process 𝑝𝑖 is responsible for including
its 𝑖𝑛𝑐_ℎ𝑖𝑠𝑡s in 𝐹𝑖 at each other process.

Thus we have the following.
• (Managing false positives:) By doing broadcasts using the Byzantine Reliable Broadcast (BRB) [36,37] layer, false positives can
be prevented by ensuring no fake events are added to 𝐹 . If a
Byzantine process 𝑝𝑏 attempts to insert a fake entry (𝑒𝑥ℎ , 𝐺, 𝐶𝑚 )
about multicast send event of 𝑚 by 𝑝ℎ in 𝐹ℎ (whether ℎ = 𝑏 or
ℎ ≠ 𝑏) at a correct process 𝑝𝑔 via a message (𝐺′ , 𝐶𝑚′ ) sent to 𝑝𝑔 ,
𝑝𝑔 can verify whether or not this insertion is valid as based on
the Reliability (or Termination) property of BRB, (𝐺, 𝐶𝑚 ) must be
delivered by the BRB layer at all correct processes including 𝑝𝑔 .
Only if (𝐺, 𝐶𝑚 ) is delivered to 𝑝𝑔 and 𝑝𝑏 ∈ 𝐺 is authenticity of 𝐶𝑚
verified (similarly for other messages in the control information
of (𝐺′ , 𝐶𝑚′ )).
Once (𝐺′ , 𝐶𝑚′ ) is BRB delivered, the sequence of receive events
like 𝑒𝑦𝑏 of (𝐺, 𝐶𝑚 ) (and other similar messages) at 𝑝𝑏 up to the
send event of (𝐺′ , 𝐶𝑚′ ), whose authenticity is verified, and that
send event of (𝐺′ , 𝐶𝑚′ ), can be inserted in 𝐹𝑏 . The entry about the
send event of 𝑚 (that is, of 𝐶𝑚 , to 𝐺) would be inserted in 𝐹ℎ
because/when 𝐶𝑚 is BRB delivered at 𝑝𝑔 (whether or not 𝑝𝑔 ∈ 𝐺).
The receive event of (𝐺′ , 𝐶𝑚′ ) occurs and is added to 𝐹𝑔 only if
𝑝𝑔 ∈ 𝐺′ . Now in particular, 𝑝𝑔 may be 𝑝𝑖 because it is correct.
Therefore, correct processes including 𝑝𝑖 have a mechanism to
prevent fake send events (and fake receive events) from being
inserted in 𝐹 , ensuring no false positives.
Note that there is no false positive only in the sense that the
dependency of 𝐶𝑚 before 𝐶𝑚′ is valid and not fake, i.e., 𝐶𝑚 was
sent to 𝑝𝑏 and was delivered to 𝑝𝑏 before 𝑝𝑏 sent 𝐶𝑚′ . However,
a correct process 𝑝𝑔 can never know whether the content of 𝐶𝑚
is decryptable by the group key 𝐾𝐺 and is semantically sound. If
semantic validity is a requirement, then this dependency of 𝐶𝑚
before 𝐶𝑚′ may be fake and false positives cannot be prevented
even with cryptography.
• (Managing false negatives:) Two types of false negatives can occur.

𝐵

If there exists a causal path 𝑒𝑥ℎ ←←←→
← 𝑒∗𝑖 through correct processes, there
𝐵

will be no false positive under ←←←→
← detected at 𝑝𝑖 . Similarly, there will be
𝐵

no false negative under ←←←→
← as correct processes along the path would
have caused the insertion of the actual local histories in 𝐹 at 𝑝𝑖 . Thus
𝐹 𝑃𝐵 and 𝐹 𝑁𝐵 .
If the BCB over BRB is replaced by a regular (point-to-point) broadcast, still 𝐹 𝑃𝐵 and 𝐹 𝑁𝐵 once the broadcasts by the correct processes
are delivered; here 𝑡 < 𝑛 instead of 𝑡 < 𝑛∕3 as required by BRB.
4.4. Results for ‘‘happened before’’ allowing cryptography
4.4.1. Use of group encryption
Theorem 9. It is impossible to solve causality determination (Definition
5) as specified by CD(𝐸, 𝐹 , 𝑒∗𝑖 ) in an asynchronous multicast-based message
passing system with one or more Byzantine processes even when using
cryptography.
Proof. The proof structure is similar to that for Theorem 3 but
combines elements from Theorem 4. We outline the logic that CD
(Definition 5) cannot be solved for when the underlying send events are
multicasts. In particular, we show that the collected execution history
𝐹 cannot be made to match 𝐸.
A send-receive dependency induced by a multicast send event 𝑒𝑥ℎ by
𝑝ℎ when it sends message 𝑚 to multicast group 𝐺 needs to be verified
by other processes before insertion in 𝐹ℎ while not disclosing contents
of 𝑚 to processes outside 𝐺 for confidentiality. So the ciphertext 𝐶𝑚 of
𝑚 signed by the group key 𝐾𝐺 is created (to maintain confidentiality)
and sent via Byzantine Reliable Broadcast (BRB) so that other processes
can verify that the message was indeed sent. It is assumed that each
multicast group shares a unique symmetric key for encryption and
decryption of messages intended for processes in that group. (𝐺, 𝐶𝑚 ) are
the parameters of a BRB broadcast. On arrival of (𝐺, 𝐶𝑚 ) at 𝑝𝑏 , there are
2 cases.

1. A Byzantine process 𝑝𝑔 can delete from 𝐹𝑔 information
about a multicast of 𝑚 (i.e., of (𝐺, 𝐶𝑚 )) by 𝑝ℎ at 𝑒𝑥ℎ that
it has received and such that 𝑝𝑔 ∈ 𝐺, despite doing
broadcasts using the BRB layer. Even if 𝑒𝑥ℎ → 𝑒∗𝑖 where the
causality chain passes through a message multicast event
subsequently at 𝑝𝑔 after receiving 𝑚, 𝑝𝑖 has no way to know
about this causality chain if 𝑝𝑔 chooses not to disclose it.
Further by Theorem 1, a false negative may occur if the

1. 𝑝𝑏 ∈ 𝐺: 𝑝𝑏 decrypts 𝐶𝑚 using the group key 𝐾𝐺 . (a) If the
decrypted 𝑚 is valid (and 𝑝𝑏 is non-Byzantine), a receive event
𝑒𝑦𝑏 occurs and 𝑝𝑏 can include the send event 𝑒𝑥ℎ and receive event
𝑒𝑦𝑏 of 𝐶𝑚 (in the form of control information, ⟨𝑒𝑥ℎ , 𝑒𝑦𝑏 , (𝐺, 𝐶𝑚 )⟩) on
the next message it sends to help build causal chains. (b) If 𝐶𝑚 is
8

Parallel Computing 124 (2025) 103136

A. Misra and A.D. Kshemkalyani

• hashes over fake events can lead to FPs,
• hashes over a swapped order of (local) events can lead to FNs,
and
• hashes not taken/reported over actual events that occurred can
lead to FNs,

receive event of 𝑚, i.e., of (𝐺, 𝐶𝑚 ), by 𝑝𝑔 where 𝑝𝑔 ∈ 𝐺, is
not disclosed to the rest of the system by a Byzantine 𝑝𝑔 or
if the receive event is swapped after a subsequent multicast
event by 𝑝𝑔 that is part of the causality chain 𝑒𝑥ℎ → 𝑒∗𝑖 , in
what 𝑝𝑔 discloses to the rest of the system thereby breaking
the causality chain of 𝐸 in 𝐹 .
2. A false negative may occur due to out-of-band communication, one form of which is as follows. If both sender 𝑝ℎ and
receiver 𝑝𝑏 are Byzantine and 𝑝ℎ shared the group key with
𝑝𝑏 even though 𝑝𝑏 ∉ 𝐺, 𝐶𝑚 is decryptable by 𝑝𝑏 and there
is a dependency from 𝑝ℎ to 𝑝𝑏 . As 𝑝𝑏 ∉ 𝐺, no other correct
process will be able to verify this dependency, resulting in
a false negative.

because they corroborate 𝐹 and do not help to prevent contamination
of 𝐹 or filter out malicious entries in 𝐹 .
Consider the encoding of the causal past using recursive hash histories as follows. Let 𝐻 be a (cryptographic) collision-resistant hash
function such that computationally it is not feasible to find 𝑦 such that
𝐻(𝑦) = 𝐻(𝑥). Let 𝑠̂𝑥𝑖 denote the hash associated with state 𝑠𝑥𝑖 .
• Initialize: 𝑠̂0𝑖 = 𝐻(⟨𝑠0𝑖 ⟩).
• At internal event 𝑒𝑥𝑖 : 𝑠̂𝑥𝑖 = 𝐻(⟨𝑠̂𝑥−1
, 𝑒𝑥𝑖 ⟩).
𝑖
• At send event 𝑒𝑥𝑖 of 𝑚 to 𝑝𝑗 :
𝑠̂𝑥𝑖 = 𝐻(⟨𝑠̂𝑥−1
, 𝑚⟩); send (𝑚, 𝑠̂𝑥𝑖 ) to 𝑝𝑗 .
𝑖

To prevent all such false negatives, Byzantine processes, their
actual execution histories, and causal chains from and through
such processes need to be identified.
Note that in the bullet above regarding prevention of false positives, if 𝐶𝑚 is not delivered to 𝑝𝑔 within the time to report 𝐹 ,
the entry about sending of 𝐶𝑚 is not added to 𝐹ℎ even though 𝐶𝑚
might have been sent. However the message 𝐶𝑚′ carrying information about sending of 𝐶𝑚 is considered received/delivered, and
hence 𝑒𝑥ℎ → 𝑒∗𝑖 . So this particular scenario contributes to a false
negative.

• At receive event 𝑒𝑥𝑖 of (𝑚, 𝑠̂𝑤
𝑗 ) from 𝑝𝑗 :
process 𝑚; 𝑠̂𝑥𝑖 = 𝐻(⟨𝑠̂𝑥−1
, 𝑠̂𝑤
𝑖
𝑗 , 𝑚⟩).
The second component 𝑠̂𝑥𝑖 sent with a message acts as a (recursive)
proof. For a process 𝑝𝑔 to claim that it has received a message (sent at a
send event 𝑒𝑥ℎ that did not occur) it has to create the proof that encodes
the causal history (causal past) up to the supposed send event. This is
checked against the proof of 𝑒𝑥ℎ that 𝑝ℎ provides and the hashes of the
events in the causal past of 𝑒𝑥ℎ . The Byzantine processes can collude to
create an alternate execution history/causal past that they have agreed
on among themselves and executed, and corresponding event hashes
and recursive hash histories that support the alternate reality of 𝑝𝑔 .
If 𝑛 > 2𝑡, where 𝑡 is the upper bound on the number of Byzantine
processes, such Byzantine behavior can be detected by taking a majority
view. Thus such ensuing false positives can be prevented. However,
false negatives will still occur because hashes taken over a swapped
order of events and hashes not taken/reported over actual events that
occurred, with a matching 𝐹 , break causal chains of 𝐸 in 𝐹 .

Thus, to solve CD, it is necessary to identify Byzantine processes,
their actual execution histories, and causal chains from and through
them. Therefore Black_Box ⪯ CD and, as Consensus ⪯ Black_Box, hence
Consensus ⪯ CD. As Consensus is unsolvable, CD is also unsolvable. □
In the proof of Theorem 9, the number of Byzantine processes 𝑡 <
𝑛∕3 due to BRB of Bracha [37].
Theorem 10. It is impossible to solve causality determination (Definition
5) as specified by CD(𝐸, 𝐹 , 𝑒∗𝑖 ) in an asynchronous unicast-based message
passing system with one or more Byzantine processes even when using
cryptography.

4.5. Results for ‘‘Byzantine happened before’’ allowing cryptography
Proof. The proof of Theorem 9 carries over identically where each
multicast group consists of two processes — the sender and the receiver.
False positives can be prevented only if the semantics of the message
content of a message do not matter. Otherwise false positives cannot
be prevented. False negatives cannot be prevented. □

𝐵

To detect 𝑒 ←←←→
← 𝑒′ , from Theorems 6, 7, false positives and false negatives can be prevented for unicasts and broadcasts even without cryptography. For multicasts, from the proof of Theorem 9, Section 4.3.2,
and the fact that there is a causal path through only correct processes
from 𝑒 to 𝑒′ , only all true causal dependencies are faithfully transmitted
and hence 𝐹 𝑁𝐵 and 𝐹 𝑃𝐵 . For 𝐹 𝑃𝐵 , note that semantic validity is also

Theorem 11. It is impossible to solve causality determination (Definition
5) as specified by CD(𝐸, 𝐹 , 𝑒∗𝑖 ) in an asynchronous broadcast-based message
passing system with one or more Byzantine processes even when using
cryptography.

𝐵

guaranteed when 𝑒 ←←←→
← 𝑒′ . This gives the following results.
Theorem 12.

It is possible to solve causality determination (Definition
𝐵

6) as specified by CD_B(𝐸, 𝐹 , 𝑒∗𝑖 ), now defined in terms of the ←←←→
← relation,
in an asynchronous unicast-based message passing system with one or more
Byzantine processes when using cryptography.

Proof. The proof of Theorem 4 which is for broadcast mode of message
passing without cryptography carries over mostly identically with the
two observations that

Theorem 13. It is possible to solve causality determination (Definition 6)

1. (Managing false positives:) False positives can be prevented even
without cryptography, and
2. (Managing false negatives:) False negatives cannot be prevented
due to Theorem 1 whose proof is independent of whether or not
cryptography is used. □

𝐵

as specified by CD_B(𝐸, 𝐹 , 𝑒∗𝑖 ), now defined in terms of the ←←←→
← relation, in
an asynchronous broadcast-based message passing system with one or more
Byzantine processes when using cryptography.
Theorem 14. It is possible to solve causality determination (Definition 6)
𝐵

4.4.2. Use of recursive hash histories
In an alternate cryptography-based approach, we can use event
hashes, message hashes, and recursive hash histories (hash taken over
the current event and the current state) [38–41] to provide a proof
of the causal past in 𝐹 . However, solutions based on this approach
conform to the results shown in Section 4.4.1. This is because the
hashes reported by Byzantine processes and those reported by correct
processes impacted by the Byzantine processes may be in conformity
to the events, messages and execution histories reported in 𝐹 and not
match 𝐸. In particular, while matching 𝐹 ,

as specified by CD_B(𝐸, 𝐹 , 𝑒∗𝑖 ), now defined in terms of the ←←←→
← relation, in
an asynchronous multicast-based message passing system with one or more
Byzantine processes when using cryptography.
5. Auxiliary results on relationships of CD to other problems
5.1. Relationship to consensus
We show two auxiliary results about the relationship of CD to
Consensus in this section. First, in asynchronous systems with Byzantine
9

Parallel Computing 124 (2025) 103136

A. Misra and A.D. Kshemkalyani

failures, we show that CD is harder than Consensus by (i) showing
that even if Consensus were solvable, CD cannot be solved, i.e., 𝐶𝐷 
𝐶𝑜𝑛𝑠𝑒𝑛𝑠𝑢𝑠, and (ii) combining with Theorems 3–5 and Theorems 9–11
which showed that Consensus ⪯ 𝐶𝐷 under Byzantine failures. Second,
we show that under crash failures in asynchronous systems, CD is
solvable but Consensus is not solvable by the FLP result [35]; thus
𝐶𝑜𝑛𝑠𝑒𝑛𝑠𝑢𝑠  𝐶𝐷 and 𝐶𝐷 ⪯ 𝐶𝑜𝑛𝑠𝑒𝑛𝑠𝑢𝑠.

processes. However, solving Consensus in the crash failure model requires identifying the crashed processes in asynchronous systems —
which is impossible by the FLP impossibility result [35]. Hence, solving Consensus is impossible while solving CD is possible under crash
failures.
It follows that Consensus  CD and CD ⪯ Consensus under crash
failures. □

Theorem 15. In an asynchronous system with Byzantine failures, 𝐶𝐷 
𝐶𝑜𝑛𝑠𝑒𝑛𝑠𝑢𝑠 and the CD problem is harder than Consensus.

5.2. Causal ordering of messages (CO)
We consider the relationship of CD to the problem of causal ordering
of messages CO.

Proof. Let there exist an oracle accessible to each process that identifies each other process as being either correct or Byzantine. This allows
each correct process to know the identity of all other correct processes.
It now broadcasts its initial value of the Consensus problem and waits
for the corresponding broadcasts from the set of other correct processes.
After obtaining the initial values of all other correct processes, a correct
process runs a local algorithm to decide on the consensus output — if
the initial values are all the same, output that value, otherwise output
a default value. This satisfies Agreement, Validity, and Termination
clauses of Consensus. Thus, knowing the identities of all Byzantine
processes, Consensus can be solved. The oracle is a sufficient condition
to solve Consensus.
Let us revisit the proof of Theorem 1. In the determination of 𝑒𝑥ℎ →
𝑒∗𝑖 , a false negative may arise when a send-receive event pair (𝑒𝑢𝑓 , 𝑒𝑣𝑔 ) in
a causal chain from 𝑒𝑥ℎ to 𝑒∗𝑖 is missing as per 𝐹 . The causal chain has
′
′
the following subsequence: ⟨⋯ 𝑒𝑢𝑓 , 𝑒𝑣𝑔 , 𝑒𝑣𝑔 ⋯⟩, where 𝑒𝑣𝑔 is a send event
′
at 𝑝𝑔 . Both 𝑒𝑣𝑔 and 𝑒𝑣𝑔 are local to 𝑝𝑔 . A Byzantine 𝑝𝑔 can suppress letting
the rest of the system know of the occurrence of 𝑒𝑣𝑔 or swap the order of
′
occurrence of 𝑒𝑣𝑔 and 𝑒𝑣𝑔 in what it lets the rest of the system know about
the occurrence of the two local events. Both actions have the effect of
breaking the causality chain from 𝑒𝑥ℎ to 𝑒∗𝑖 which can give rise to a false
negative. With the oracle we assumed (a sufficient condition for solving
Consensus), 𝑝𝑖 can know whether or not 𝑝𝑔 is Byzantine. Knowing that
𝑝𝑔 is Byzantine when the causality chain is not detected by 𝑝𝑖 as per
𝐹 does not help in knowing whether 𝑝𝑔 has broken the causality chain
from 𝑒𝑥ℎ to 𝑒∗𝑖 , or whether the causality does not exist in 𝐸. Thus, a
false negative can occur if 𝑝𝑖 infers from 𝐹 and this argument holds
for unicasts, multicasts, and broadcasts. If 𝑝𝑖 wrongly guesses that the
causality chain exists in 𝐸 but was broken by 𝑝𝑔 in 𝐹 and assumes the
causality chain existed, then a false positive can occur. Also observe
that if a causality chain does not exist in 𝐸 but is observed in 𝐹 , a false
positive can occur. This argument holds for unicasts and multicasts but
not for broadcasts. Refer to the results in Table 1 and Theorems 3, 4, 5.
In whichever mode of communication, false negatives and possibly false
positives can occur and therefore knowing the identity of the Byzantine
processes does not help to solve CD. Thus CD  Consensus. Combining
this with Theorems 3–5 and Theorems 9–11 that showed that Consensus
⪯ 𝐶𝐷, it follows that CD is harder than Consensus. □

Definition 7. The happened before relation → on (application-level)
messages consists of the following rules:
1. If 𝑝𝑖 sent or delivered message 𝑚 before sending message 𝑚′ , then
𝑚 → 𝑚′ .
2. If 𝑚 → 𝑚′ and 𝑚′ → 𝑚′′ , then 𝑚 → 𝑚′′ .
Definition 8. The causal past of message 𝑚 is denoted as 𝐶𝑃 (𝑚) and
defined as the set of messages that causally precede message 𝑚 under
→.
The CO problem is specified as follows.
Definition 9. A causal ordering algorithm (for unicast/multicast/
broadcast messages) must ensure the following:
1. Strong Safety: ∀𝑚′ ∈ 𝐶𝑃 (𝑚) such that 𝑚′ and 𝑚 are sent to the
same (correct) process, no correct process delivers 𝑚 before 𝑚′ .
2. Liveness: Each message sent by a correct process to another
correct process will be eventually delivered.
When correct process 𝑝𝑟 receives 𝑚2 , it needs to correctly determine
whether to deliver 𝑚2 before a message 𝑚1 or to wait for 𝑚1 before
delivery of 𝑚2 . To formulate this, we rephrase the causal ordering
problem (Definition 9) as CO(𝐸, 𝐹 , 𝑚2 ) as follows [23,25].
Definition 10.
The causal ordering problem 𝐶𝑂(𝐸, 𝐹 , 𝑚2 ) for a
message 𝑚2 received by a correct process 𝑝𝑟 is to devise an algorithm to
collect the execution history 𝐸 as 𝐹 at 𝑝𝑟 such that 𝐶𝑂_𝐷𝑒𝑙𝑖𝑣(𝑚2 ) = 1,
where
{
1 if ∀𝑚1 , 𝑚1 → 𝑚2 |𝐸 = 𝑚1 → 𝑚2 |𝐹
𝐶𝑂_𝐷𝑒𝑙𝑖𝑣(𝑚2 ) =
0 otherwise
𝐶𝑂_𝐷𝑒𝑙𝑖𝑣(𝑚2 ) returns 1 iff ∀𝑚1 , 𝑚1 → 𝑚2 |𝐸 = 𝑚1 → 𝑚2 |𝐹 . When 1 is
returned, the algorithm output matches the actual truth and solves CO
correctly. Thus, returning 1 indicates that the problem has been solved
correctly by the algorithm using 𝐹 . 0 is returned if either
1. ∃𝑚1 such that 𝑚1 → 𝑚2 |𝐸 = 1 and 𝑚1 → 𝑚2 |𝐹 = 0, denoting
a strong safety violation because 𝑝𝑟 will not wait for 𝑚1 before
delivery of 𝑚2 , or
2. ∃𝑚1 such that 𝑚1 → 𝑚2 |𝐸 = 0 and 𝑚1 → 𝑚2 |𝐹 = 1, denoting a
liveness violation because 𝑝𝑟 may continue waiting indefinitely
for a fake 𝑚1 to arrive before delivering the arrived 𝑚2 .

Theorem 16.
In an asynchronous system with crash failures, CD is
solvable but Consensus is not solvable; thus 𝐶𝑜𝑛𝑠𝑒𝑛𝑠𝑢𝑠  𝐶𝐷 and 𝐶𝐷 ⪯
𝐶𝑜𝑛𝑠𝑒𝑛𝑠𝑢𝑠.
Proof. To solve CD does not require identifying the crashed processes;
their (correct) execution histories can be faithfully transmitted to other
processes (transitively) via the execution messages sent in the execution
history itself as it grows and be present at the other (correct) processes’
execution histories and in in-transit messages. The execution histories
of senders that might crash can transitively propagate beginning via
messages they sent before their crash to other non-crashed processes.
By this logic, for a process 𝑝ℎ that crashes, 𝑒𝑥ℎ → 𝑒∗𝑖 |𝐹 is equal
to 𝑒𝑥ℎ → 𝑒∗𝑖 |𝐸 for correct process 𝑝𝑖 . So it suffices to consider the
execution histories 𝐸𝑗 of non-crashed processes (that include 𝑝𝑖 ) to
determine 𝑒𝑥ℎ → 𝑒∗𝑖 and solve CD without having to identify the crashed

Theorem 17. In an asynchronous system with Byzantine processes, 𝐶𝑂 ⪯
𝐶𝐷 ∧ 𝐶𝐷 ⪯ 𝐶𝑂.
Proof. We first show 𝐶𝑂 ⪯ 𝐶𝐷. For instance 𝐶𝑂(𝐸, 𝐹 , 𝑚2 ), let 𝑚2 be
received at 𝑝𝑟 at event 𝑒∗𝑟 . Invoke 𝐶𝐷(𝐸, 𝐹 , 𝑒∗𝑟 ). If this can be solved,
then it is straightforward to observe that 𝐶𝑂(𝐸, 𝐹 , 𝑚2 ) is solved as 𝑝𝑟
now knows which non-fake messages 𝑚1 to wait for before delivering
𝑚2 . Thus 𝐶𝑂 ⪯ 𝐶𝐷.
Next we show 𝐶𝐷 ⪯ 𝐶𝑂. Consider instance 𝐶𝐷(𝐸, 𝐹 , 𝑒∗𝑖 ). Let
ℎ

𝑚2 (𝑗) (∀𝑗 ∈ 𝑃 ) be the most recent message received from 𝑝𝑗 at 𝑒𝑖 𝑗
10

Parallel Computing 124 (2025) 103136

A. Misra and A.D. Kshemkalyani

• Assumption: What the process in the library/TEE does is outside
Byzantine influence (and reigns in/negates actions by Byzantine
processes by forcing them to do exactly as the process in the
library/TEE dictates or be ignored).

at or before 𝑒∗𝑖 . If 𝐶𝑂(𝐸, 𝐹 , 𝑚) can be solved, all (𝑛 − 1) instances
𝐶𝑂(𝐸, 𝐹 , 𝑚2 (𝑗)) can be solved. This implies that all (and only all) send
ℎ
and receive events causally preceding 𝑒𝑖 𝑗 and hence 𝑒∗𝑖 can be correctly
identified. Thus there are no false negatives and no false positives, and
𝐶𝐷(𝐸, 𝐹 , 𝑒∗𝑖 ) can be solved. Thus 𝐶𝐷 ⪯ 𝐶𝑂. □

If the assumption can be justified one could trivially solve problems
known to be unsolvable. For example,

Theorem 18 ([42]). In a system with even one Byzantine process, the CO
problem is subject to the same limitations (exposure to false positives and
false negatives) as the CD problem, resulting in liveness and safety violations.

• Claim: It is possible to solve BA deterministically, with Byzantine
failures bounded at (𝑛 − 2).
• Reasoning: The Validator is assumed to be reliable. Its backend executes in a TEE and can act as a correct process whose correctness
is known to all processes. This Validator can receive the initial
value from the initiator process and broadcast it to all processes,
solving BA in 𝑂(1) time (2 message hops). Any values sent by
processes that contradict (only Byzantine processes’ values may
contradict) the values of the Validator are ignored.
• Contradiction: This contradicts FLP impossibility [35] because BA
cannot be solved deterministically in an asynchronous fault-prone
system. It also contradicts the bound (a maximum of 𝑡 Byzantine
processes in a system of at least 3𝑡 + 1 processes) for synchronous
systems [30].
• Conclusion: The assumption about a reliable Validator reduces a
Byzantine-prone system into a sequential system with a reliable
and centralized oracle — the Validator.

Proof. Let 𝑒𝑥ℎ be a send event of a message 𝑚1 to 𝑝𝑖 , 𝑒𝑧𝑗 be an event
where 𝑝𝑗 sends a message 𝑚2 to 𝑝𝑖 , 𝜙 be a predicate on when/whether
𝑝𝑖 can safely deliver 𝑚2 sent at 𝑒𝑧𝑗 to itself (i.e., has received and
determines it is safe to give 𝑚2 with respect to all other messages
(like 𝑚1 ) sent to itself in the execution to the application), 𝑒𝑖𝑦̂ be an
event where 𝑝𝑖 delivers the message 𝑚2 from 𝑝𝑗 , and → be defined on
application messages.
The formula 𝛷𝐶𝑂 (𝑒𝑖𝑦̂ ) needs to be satisfied in order to solve CO,
where:
⋀
𝑑𝑒𝑓
𝛷𝐶𝑂 (𝑒𝑖𝑦̂ ) =
(𝑒𝑥ℎ → 𝑒𝑧𝑗 |𝐸 = 𝑒𝑥ℎ → 𝑒𝑧𝑗 |𝐹 ) ∧ 𝜙(𝑒𝑖𝑦̂ ).
𝑒𝑥ℎ ∈𝐸 ∪ 𝐹

As 𝑒𝑥ℎ is a send event, detecting 𝑒𝑥ℎ → 𝑒𝑧𝑗 is susceptible to false
positives and/or false negatives (refer Table 1). Thus it cannot be
guaranteed that the predicate 𝑒𝑥ℎ → 𝑒𝑧𝑗 |𝐸 = 𝑒𝑥ℎ → 𝑒𝑧𝑗 |𝐹 in the formula
𝛷𝐶𝑂 can be satisfied. Hence, CO cannot be solved.
A false positive of the CD problem can result in a liveness violation
– waiting indefinitely at 𝑝𝑖 for the delivery of 𝑚2 until the prior delivery
of 𝑚1 that was never sent by 𝑝ℎ – in the CO problem. A false negative
of the CD problem is a safety violation – not waiting for the delivery
of 𝑚1 that was sent by 𝑝ℎ at 𝑒𝑥ℎ to 𝑝𝑖 – in the CO problem. □

Detecting causality between a pair of events is a fundamental problem [2]. Other problems that use this as a building block include the
following:
• detecting causality relation between two ‘‘meta-events’’ [44],
each of which spans multiple events across multiple processes
[45,46],
• detecting the interaction type between a pair of intervals at
different processes [47],
• detecting the fine-grained modality of a distributed predicate
[48–50], and data-stream based global event monitoring using
pairwise interactions between processes [51].

6. Discussion and conclusions
We proved the results about possibility or impossibility of determining causality between events in the presence of Byzantine processes using executions, independent of specific implementations such
as causality graphs, vector clocks and their variants, and other clock
systems. The impossibility of being able to determine causal order
between a pair of events under the → relation in the presence of even a
single Byzantine process when message communication takes place by
unicasting or by multicasting or by broadcasting are negative results.
Only in the cases of unicasting and broadcasting can there be a weak
positive result in that if there exists a causal path going through events

Impossibility results analogous to the ones we have shown also hold for
these problems. A reduction from CD to each of the above problems can
be established; the impossibility of solving these above problems would
directly follow.
In light of the impossibility results in asynchronous systems, we
showed that the CD problem can be solved in synchronous systems
[52,53] using the replicated state machine (RSM) based approach
[54]. As RSMs can be implemented deterministically even in partially
synchronous systems, the solvability of CD also extends to such systems.
Based on the impossibility of solving CD in asynchronous systems, several other Byzantine-tolerant state observation, synchronization, and graph computation problems in asynchronous distributed
systems have also been shown impossible to solve using distributed
algorithms [42].

𝐵

at only correct processes between the two events, i.e., the ←←←→
← relation
holds, then the causality relation can be determined correctly. However, it is impossible to ascertain whether such a path going through
events at non-Byzantine processes exists, so this result is of questionable
practical use. This is also an expensive operation because each broadcast must be done via Byzantine Reliable Broadcast which requires
𝑂(𝑛) control message broadcasts per application message broadcast and
an increased latency that depends on the particular implementation
of BRB used. We also showed that the impossibility results under the
→ relation remain despite allowing the use of cryptography. However
𝐵

CRediT authorship contribution statement

in contrast, we showed possibility results under the ←←←→
← relation for
unicasts, broadcasts, and multicasts using cryptography.
One way out of the impossibility results then is to either assume the
‘‘Byzantine’’ process or a parallel process can run in a OS-controlled
(user) library not subject to Byzantine influence or use trusted components (such as hardware) or assume a Trusted Execution Environment
(TEE) to curtail the Byzantine behavior of processes [43]. For example,
trusted components (TC) can issue timestamps to events correctly —
however the assumption that the processes are Byzantine is negated.
Such assumptions about a Validator can solve problems such as Byzantine Agreement (BA) and Consensus that are known to be unsolvable
in asynchronous systems. More specifically, the correctness of such
approaches hinges on the following assumption.

Anshuman Misra: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original
draft, Methodology, Investigation, Formal analysis, Conceptualization.
Ajay D. Kshemkalyani: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original
draft, Validation, Supervision, Project administration, Methodology,
Investigation, Formal analysis, Conceptualization.
Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to
influence the work reported in this paper.
11

Parallel Computing 124 (2025) 103136

A. Misra and A.D. Kshemkalyani

Data availability

[23] A. Misra, A.D. Kshemkalyani, Solvability of Byzantine fault-tolerant causal
ordering problems, in: M. Koulali, M. Mezini (Eds.), Proc. 10th International
Conference on Networked Systems, NETYS, Virtual Event, May 17-19, 2022, in:
Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 13464, Springer, 2022, pp. 87–103,
http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-17436-0_7.
[24] A. Misra, A.D. Kshemkalyani, Causal ordering in the presence of Byzantine
processes, in: 28th IEEE International Conference on Parallel and Distributed
Systems, ICPADS, 2022, pp. 130–138, http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/ICPADS56603.
2022.00025.
[25] A. Misra, A.D. Kshemkalyani, Byzantine fault-tolerant causal ordering, in: 24th
International Conference on Distributed Computing and Networking, ICDCN,
2023, pp. 100–109, http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3571306.3571395.
[26] A. Misra, A.D. Kshemkalyani, Byzantine fault-tolerant causal order satisfying
strong safety, in: S. Dolev, B. Schieber (Eds.), Stabilization, Safety, and Security
of Distributed Systems - 25th International Symposium, in: Lecture Notes in
Computer Science, vol. 14310, Springer, 2023, pp. 111–125, http://dx.doi.org/
10.1007/978-3-031-44274-2_10.
[27] A. Misra, A.D. Kshemkalyani, Solvability of Byzantine fault-tolerant causal
ordering: Synchronous systems case, in: J. Hong, J.W. Park (Eds.), Proceedings
of the 39th ACM/SIGAPP Symposium on Applied Computing, SAC 2024, Avila,
Spain, April 8-12, 2024, ACM, 2024, pp. 251–256, http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/
3605098.3636063.
[28] A. Misra, A.D. Kshemkalyani, Byzantine-tolerant causal ordering for unicasts,
multicasts, and broadcasts, IEEE Trans. Parallel Distrib. Syst. 35 (5) (2024)
814–828, http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/TPDS.2024.3368280.
[29] M.C. Pease, R.E. Shostak, L. Lamport, Reaching agreement in the presence
of faults, J. ACM 27 (2) (1980) 228–234, http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/322186.
322188.
[30] L. Lamport, R.E. Shostak, M.C. Pease, The Byzantine generals problem, ACM
Trans. Program. Lang. Syst. 4 (3) (1982) 382–401, http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/
357172.357176, URL http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/357172.357176.
[31] Y. Shang, Consensus of hybrid multi-agent systems with malicious nodes, IEEE
Trans. Circuits Syst. II Express Briefs 67-II (4) (2020) 685–689, http://dx.doi.
org/10.1109/TCSII.2019.2918752.
[32] Y. Shang, Resilient cluster consensus of multiagent systems, IEEE Trans. Syst.
Man Cybern. Syst. 52 (1) (2022) 346–356, http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/TSMC.
2020.2997855.
[33] C. Dwork, N.A. Lynch, L.J. Stockmeyer, Consensus in the presence of partial
synchrony, J. ACM 35 (2) (1988) 288–323, http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/42282.
42283, URL http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/42282.42283.
[34] Y. Shang, A system model of three-body interactions in complex networks:
consensus and conservation, Proc. R. Soc. A 478 (2022) 20210564, URL https:
//doi.org/10.1098/rspa.2021.0564.
[35] M.J. Fischer, N.A. Lynch, M. Paterson, Impossibility of distributed consensus with
one faulty process, J. ACM 32 (2) (1985) 374–382, http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/
3149.214121.
[36] G. Bracha, S. Toueg, Asynchronous consensus and broadcast protocols, J. ACM
32 (4) (1985) 824–840, http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/4221.214134.
[37] G. Bracha, Asynchronous Byzantine agreement protocols, Inform. and Comput.
75 (2) (1987) 130–143, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/0890-5401(87)90054-X.
[38] J.D. Cohen, Recursive hashing functions for n-grams, ACM Trans. Inf. Syst. 15
(3) (1997) 291–320, http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/256163.256168.
[39] B. Kang, R. Wilensky, J. Kubiatowicz, The hash history approach for reconciling mutual inconsistency, in: 23rd International Conference on Distributed
Computing Systems, 2003, pp. 670–677, http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/ICDCS.2003.
1203518.
[40] M. Kleppmann, H. Howard, Byzantine eventual consistency and the fundamental
limits of peer-to-peer databases, 2020, CoRR abs/2012.00472. arXiv:2012.00472.
URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2012.00472.
[41] F. Jacob, H. Hartenstein, Logical clocks and monotonicity for Byzantine-tolerant
replicated data types, in: Proceedings of the 11th Workshop on Principles and
Practice of Consistency for Distributed Data, PaPoC 2024, ACM, 2024, pp. 37–43,
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3642976.3653034.
[42] A.D. Kshemkalyani, A. Misra, Impossibility results for Byzantine-tolerant state
observation, synchronization, and graph computation problems, Algorithms 18
(2025) 26, http://dx.doi.org/10.3390/a18010026.
[43] G. Sun, T. Tao, Y. Guo, M.H. Yiqing, J. Li, Building a verifiable logical clock
for P2P networks, 2024, http://dx.doi.org/10.48550/ARXIV.2405.13349, CoRR
abs/2405.13349. arXiv:2405.13349.
[44] A.D. Kshemkalyani, A framework for viewing atomic events in distributed
computations, Theoret. Comput. Sci. 196 (1–2) (1998) 45–70, http://dx.doi.org/
10.1016/S0304-3975(97)00195-3.
[45] A.D. Kshemkalyani, Causality and atomicity in distributed computations, Distrib.
Comput. 11 (4) (1998) 169–189, http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s004460050048.
[46] A.D. Kshemkalyani, Reasoning about causality between distributed nonatomic
events, Artificial Intelligence 92 (1–2) (1997) 301–315, http://dx.doi.org/10.
1016/S0004-3702(97)00004-0.
[47] A.D. Kshemkalyani, Temporal interactions of intervals in distributed systems,
J. Comput. System Sci. 52 (2) (1996) 287–298, http://dx.doi.org/10.1006/jcss.
1996.0022.

No data was used for the research described in the article.

References
[1] A. Misra, A.D. Kshemkalyani, Detecting causality in the presence of Byzantine
processes: There is no holy grail, in: 21st IEEE International Symposium on
Network Computing and Applications, NCA, 2022, pp. 73–80, http://dx.doi.org/
10.1109/NCA57778.2022.10013644.
[2] R. Schwarz, F. Mattern, Detecting causal relationships in distributed computations: In search of the holy grail, Distrib. Comput. 7 (3) (1994) 149–174,
http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/BF02277859.
[3] L. Lamport, Time, clocks, and the ordering of events in a distributed system,
Commun. ACM 21 (7) (1978) 558–565, http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/359545.
359563.
[4] A.D. Kshemkalyani, M. Singhal, Distributed Computing: Principles, Algorithms,
and Systems, Cambridge University Press, 2011, URL https://doi.org/10.1017/
CBO9780511805318.
[5] E. Elnozahy, Manetho: Fault Tolerance in Distributed Systems Using RollbackRecovery and Process Replication, PhD Thesis, Tech. Rep., Tech. Report 93-212,
Computer Science Department, Rice University, 1993.
[6] C.J. Fidge, Logical time in distributed computing systems, IEEE Comput. 24 (8)
(1991) 28–33, http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/2.84874.
[7] F. Mattern, Virtual time and global states of distributed systems, in: Parallel and
Distributed Algorithms, North-Holland, 1988, pp. 215–226.
[8] B. Charron-Bost, Concerning the size of logical clocks in distributed systems,
Inform. Process. Lett. 39 (1) (1991) 11–16, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/00200190(91)90055-M.
[9] A.D. Kshemkalyani, The power of logical clock abstractions, Distrib. Comput. 17
(2) (2004) 131–150, http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s00446-003-0105-9.
[10] R. Prakash, M. Singhal, Dependency sequences and hierarchical clocks: Efficient
alternatives to vector clocks for mobile computing systems, Wirel. Netw. 3 (5)
(1997) 349–360, http://dx.doi.org/10.1023/A:1019134007206.
[11] P.A.S. Ward, D.J. Taylor, Self-organizing hierarchical cluster timestamps, in: Proc.
7th International Euro-Par Conference on Parallel Processing, 2001, pp. 46–56,
http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/3-540-44681-8_8.
[12] F.J. Torres-Rojas, M. Ahamad, Plausible clocks: Constant size logical clocks for
distributed systems, Distrib. Comput. 12 (4) (1999) 179–195, http://dx.doi.org/
10.1007/s004460050065.
[13] M. Singhal, A.D. Kshemkalyani, An efficient implementation of vector clocks,
Inform. Process. Lett. 43 (1) (1992) 47–52, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/00200190(92)90028-T.
[14] N.M. Preguiça, C. Baquero, P.S. Almeida, V. Fonte, R. Gonçalves, Brief announcement: efficient causality tracking in distributed storage systems with dotted
version vectors, in: ACM Symposium on Principles of Distributed Computing,
PODC, 2012, pp. 335–336, http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2332432.2332497.
[15] P.S. Almeida, C. Baquero, V. Fonte, Interval tree clocks, in: Proc. 12th International Conference on Principles of Distributed Systems, OPODIS, 2008, pp.
259–274, http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-3-540-92221-6_18.
[16] S.S. Kulkarni, M. Demirbas, D. Madappa, B. Avva, M. Leone, Logical physical
clocks, in: Proc. 18th International Conference on Principles of Distributed
Systems, OPODIS, 2014, pp. 17–32, http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-144726_2.
[17] A.D. Kshemkalyani, M. Shen, B. Voleti, Prime clock: Encoded vector clock to
characterize causality in distributed systems, J. Parallel Distrib. Comput. 140
(2020) 37–51, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jpdc.2020.02.008.
[18] A.D. Kshemkalyani, A. Misra, The bloom clock to characterize causality in
distributed systems, in: The 23rd International Conference on Network-Based
Information Systems, NBiS 2020, in: Advances in Intelligent Systems and Computing, vol. 1264, Springer, 2020, pp. 269–279, http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/9783-030-57811-4_25.
[19] A. Misra, A.D. Kshemkalyani, The bloom clock for causality testing, in: D.
Goswami, T.A. Hoang (Eds.), Proc. 17th International Conference on Distributed
Computing and Internet Technology, in: Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol.
12582, Springer, 2021, pp. 3–23, http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-656218_1.
[20] T. Pozzetti, A.D. Kshemkalyani, Resettable encoded vector clock for causality
analysis with an application to dynamic race detection, IEEE Trans. Parallel
Distrib. Syst. 32 (4) (2021) 772–785, http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/TPDS.2020.
3032293.
[21] K.P. Birman, T.A. Joseph, Reliable communication in the presence of failures,
ACM Trans. Comput. Syst. 5 (1) (1987) 47–76, http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/7351.
7478.
[22] A. Auvolat, D. Frey, M. Raynal, F. Taïani, Byzantine-tolerant causal broadcast,
Theoret. Comput. Sci. 885 (2021) 55–68, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/J.TCS.2021.
06.021.
12

Parallel Computing 124 (2025) 103136

A. Misra and A.D. Kshemkalyani
[48] A.D. Kshemkalyani, R. Kamath, Orthogonal relations for reasoning about posets,
Int. J. Intell. Syst. 17 (12) (2002) 1101–1110, http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/int.
10062.
[49] P. Chandra, A.D. Kshemkalyani, Causality-based predicate detection across space
and time, IEEE Trans. Comput. 54 (11) (2005) 1438–1453, http://dx.doi.org/10.
1109/TC.2005.176.
[50] A.D. Kshemkalyani, A fine-grained modality classification for global predicates,
IEEE Trans. Parallel Distrib. Syst. 14 (8) (2003) 807–816, http://dx.doi.org/10.
1109/TPDS.2003.1225059.
[51] P. Chandra, A.D. Kshemkalyani, Data-stream-based global event monitoring using
pairwise interactions, J. Parallel Distrib. Comput. 68 (6) (2008) 729–751, http:
//dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jpdc.2008.01.006.

[52] A. Misra, A.D. Kshemkalyani, Detecting causality in the presence of Byzantine
processes: The synchronous systems case, in: 30th International Symposium on
Temporal Representation and Reasoning, TIME, in: LIPIcs, vol. 278, Schloss
Dagstuhl - Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, 2023, pp. 11:1–11:14, http://dx.doi.
org/10.4230/LIPICS.TIME.2023.11.
[53] A. Misra, A.D. Kshemkalyani, Detecting causality in the presence of Byzantine
processes: The case of synchronous systems, Inform. and Comput. 301 (2024)
105212, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/J.IC.2024.105212.
[54] F.B. Schneider, Implementing fault-tolerant services using the state machine
approach: A tutorial, ACM Comput. Surv. 22 (4) (1990) 299–319, http://dx.
doi.org/10.1145/98163.98167.

13

